                                                                                                        1


                    Protocols for Cognitive Task Analysis
                                            Robert R. Hoffman
                             Florida Institute for Human and Machine Cognition
                                       Beth Crandall and Gary Klein
                                     Klein Associates Division of ARA
                                   Debra G. Jones and Mica R. Endsley
                                            SA Technologies


  This document is intended to empower people in the conduct of Cognitive Task Analysis and
                                 Cognitive Field Research.

All rights reserved. Copyright 2008 by R. R. Hoffman, B. Crandall, G. Klein, D. G. Jones
and M. R. Endsley. Individuals or organizations wishing to use or cite this material
should request permission from:

Robert R. Hoffman, Ph.D.,
Institute for Human & Machine Cognition
40 South Alcaniz St.
Pensacola, FL 32502-6008
rhoffman@ihmc.us

Cite as:
Hoffman, R.R., Crandall, B., Klein, G., Jone, D., & Endsley, M. (2008). "Protocols for Cognitive Task
Analysis." Technical Report, Florida Institute for Human and Machine Cognition, Pensacola, FL.

This document was prepared as a companion to Working Minds: A Practitioner’s Guide to Cognitive Task
Analysis by B. Crandall, G. Klein, G., & R. R. Hoffman. Cambridge MA: MIT Press, 2005. The CTA
protocols are best conducted through an understanding of procedural discussions in Working Minds.

This document was prepared with the support of the Advanced Decision Architectures Collaborative
Technology Alliance, sponsored by the US Army Research Laboratory under Cooperative Agreement
DAAD19-01-2-0009.
                                                                                               2

                                                     1. Introduction
2. Bootstrapping Methods
          2.1. Documentation Analysis
          2.2. The Recent Case Walkthrough
          2.3. The Knowledge Audit
          2.4. Client Interviews
3. Proficiency Scaling
          3.1. General Introduction
          3.2. Career Interviews
          3.3. Sociometry
                   3.3.1. General Protocol Notes
                   3.3.2. General Forms
                   3.3.3. Ratings Items
                   3.3.4. Sorting Items
                   3.3.5. Communication Patterns
                             3.3.5.1. Within-groups
                             3.3.5.2. Within-domains
          3.4. Cognitive Styles Analysis
4. Workplace Observations and Interviews
          4.1. General Introduction
          4.2. Workspace Analysis
          4.3. Activities Observations
          4.4. Locations Analysis
          4.5. Roles Analysis
          4.6. Decision Requirements Analysis
          4.7. Action Requirements Analysis
          4.8. SOP Analysis
5. Modeling Practitioner Reasoning
          5.1. Protocol Analysis
                   5.1.1. General Introduction
                   5.1.2. Materials
                   5.1.3. Coding Schemes
                   5.1.4. Effort
                   5.1.5. Coding Schemes Examples
                   5.1.6. Coding Verification
                   5.1.7. Procedural Variations and Short-cuts
                   5.1.8. A Final Word
          5.2. Cognitive Modeling Procedure
                   5.2.1. Introduction and Background
                   5.2.2 Protocol Notes
                             5.2.2.1. Preparation
                             5.2.2.2. Round 1
                             5.2.2.3. Round 2
                             5.2.2.4. Round 3
                             5.2.2.5. Products
                   5.2.3. Templates
                             5.2.3.1. Round 1
                             5.2.3.2. Round 2
                             5.2.3.3. Round 3
6. The Critical Decision Method
          6.1. General Description of the CDM Procedure
                   6.1.0. Preparation
                   6.1.1. Step One: Incident Selection
                   6.1.2 Step Two: Incident Recall
                   6.1.3. Step Three: Incident Retelling
                   6.1.4. Step Four: Timeline Verification and Decision Point Identification
                   6.1.5. Step Five: Deepening
                   6.1.6. Step Six: "What-if" Queries
          6.2. Protocol Notes for the Researcher
                                                                                               3

         6.3. Boiler Plate Data Collection Forms
                   6.3.0. Cover Form
                   6.3.1. Step One: Incident Selection
                   6.3.2. Step Two: Incident Recall
                   6.3.3. Step Three: Incident Retelling
                   6.3.4. Step Four: Timeline Verification and Decision Point Identification
                   6.3.5. Step Five: Deepening
                   6.3.6. Step Six: "What-if" Queries
                   6.3.7. Final Integration
                   6.3.8. Decision Requirements Table
7. Goal-Directed Task Analysis
         7.1. Introduction
         7.2. Elements of the GDTA
                   7.2.1. Goals
                   7.2.2 Decisions
                   7.2.3. Situation Awareness Requirements
         7.3. Documenting the GDTA
                   7.3.1. Goal Hierarchy
                   7.3.2. Relational Hierarchy
                   7.3.3. Identifying Goals
                   7.3.4. Defining Decisions
                   7.3.5. Delineating SA requirements
         7.4. GDTA Methodology
                   7.4.1. Step 1: Review Domain
                   7.4.2. Step 2: Initial interviews
                   7.4.3. Step 3: Develop the goal hierarchy
                   7.4.4. Step 4: Identify decisions and SA requirements
                   7.5.5. Step 5: Additional interviews / SME review of GDTA
                   7.5.6. Step 6: Revise the GDTA
                   7.5.7. Step 7: Repeat steps 5 & 6
                   7.5.9. Step 8: Validate the GDTA
         7.5. Simplifying the Process
         7.6. Conclusion
8. References
                                                                                              4


                                        1. Introduction

The purpose of this book to lay out guidance, including sample forms and instructions, for
conducting a variety of Cognitive Task Analysis and Cognitive Field Research methods
(including both knowledge elicitation and knowledge modeling procedures) that have a proven
track record of utility in service of both expertise studies and the design of new technologies.

Our presentation of guidance includes protocol notes. These are ideas, lessons learned, and
cautionary tales for the researcher. We also present Templates—prepared forms for various
tasks.

We describe methods useful in boostrapping, which involves learning about the domain and the
needs of the clients. We describe methods used in proficiency scaling and procedures for
modeling knowledge and reasoning. We describe methods coming from the academic laboratory
(e.g., Protocol Analysis), methods coming from applied research (e.g., Sociometrty) and methods
coming from Cognitive Anthropology (e.g., Workpatterns Observations).

Along the way we present lessons learned and rules of thumb that arose in the course of
conducting of a number of projects, both small-scale and large-scale. The guidance offered here
spans the entire gamut—going all the way from general advice about records-keeping, to detailed
advice about audio recording knowledge elicitation interviews; going all the way from general
issues involved in protocol analysis, to detailed advice about the problems and obstacles
involved in managing large numbers of multi-media resources for knowledge models.

Supporting material, including general guidance for the conduct of interviews and detailed
guidance for the Critical Decision Method, can be found in: Crandall, B., Klein, G., & Hoffman
R. R. (2006). Working Minds: A Practitioner’s Guide to Cognitive Task Analysis. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
                                                                                                  5


                   2. CTA Boostrapping Methods Protocols and Templates


In many projects that use Cognitive Work Analysis methodologies, one of the first steps is
bootstrapping, in which the analysts familiarize themselves with the domain.


2.1. Documentation Analysis

Bootstrapping typically involves an analysis of documents (manuals, texts, technical reports,
etc.). The literature of research and applications of knowledge elicitation converges on the notion
that documentation analysis can be a critically important method, one that should be utilized as a
matter of necessity (Hoffman, 1987; Hoffman, Shadbolt, Burton & Klein, 1995). Documentation
analysis is relied upon heavily in the Work Domain Analysis phase of Cognitive Work Analysis
(see Hoffman & Lintern, 2005; Vicente, 1999).

Documentation Analysis can be a time-consuming process, but can sometimes be indispensable
in knowledge elicitation (Kolodner, 1983). In a study of aerial photo interpreters (Hoffman,
1987), interviews about the process of terrain analysis began only after an analysis of the readily-
available basic knowledge of concepts and definitions. To take up the expert's time by asking
questions such as "What is limestone?" would have made no sense.

Although it is usually considered to be a part of bootstrapping, documentation analysis invariably
occurs throughout the entire research programme. For example, in the weather forecasting case
study (Hoffman, Coffey, & Ford, 2000), the bootstrapping process focused on an analysis of
published literatures and technical reports that made reference to the cognition of forecasters.
That process resulted in the creation of the project guidance document. However, documentation
analyses of other types occurred throughout the remainder of the project—analysis of records of
weather forecasting case studies, analysis of Standard Operating Procedures documents, analysis
of the Local forecasting Handbooks, etc.

Analysis of documents may range from underlining and note-taking to detailed propositional or
content analysis according to functional categories Documentation Analysis can be conducted
for a number of purposes or combinations of purposes. Rather than just having information flow
from documents into the researcher's understanding, the analysis of the documents can involve
specific procedures that generate records or analyses of the knowledge contained in the
documents. Documentation Analysis can:

•   Be suggestive of the reasoning of domain practitioners, and hence contribute to the forging of
    reasoning models,
•   Be useful in the attempt to construct knowledge models, since the literature may include both
    useful categories for domain knowledge and important specific "tid-bits" of domain
    knowledge. In some domains, texts and manuals contain a great deal of specific information
    about domain knowledge.
•   Be useful in the identification of leverage points—aspects of the work where even a modest
    infusion of or improvement in technology might result in a proportionately greater
    improvement in the work.
                                                                                                  6


Often, "Standard Operating Procedures" documents are a source of information for
bootstrapping. However, if one wants to use an analysis of SOP documents for other purposes,
(e.g., as a way of verifying the Decision Requirements analysis), one may hold off on even
looking at SOP documents during the bootstraping phase. Therefore, we include the protocol and
template for SOP analysis later in this document, in the category of "Workplace Observations
and Interviews.

The uses and strengths of documentation analysis notwithstanding, the limitations must also be
pointed out. Practitioners possess knowledge and strategies that do not appear in the documents
and task descriptions and, in some cases at least, could not possibly be documented. Even in
Work Domain Analysis, which is heavily oriented towards Documentation Analysis, interactions
with experts are used to confirm and refine the Abstraction-Decomposition Analyses. In the
weather forecasting project (Hoffman, Coffey, & Carnot, 2000) an expert told how she predicted
the lifting of fog. She would look out toward the downtown and see how many floors above
ground level she could count before the floors got lost in the fog deck. Her reasoning relied on a
heuristic of the form, "If I cannot see the 10th floor by 10AM, pilots will not be able to take off
until after lunchtime." Such a heuristic had great value, but is hardly the sort of thing that would
be allowed in a formal standard operating procedure document. Many observations have been
made of how engineers in process control bend rules and deviate from mandated procedures so
that they can more effectively get their jobs done (see Koopman & Hoffman, 2003). We would
hasten to generalize by saying that all practitioners who work in complex sociotechnical contexts
possess knowledge and reasoning strategies that are not captured in existing procedures or
documents, many of which represent (naughty) departures from what those experts are supposed
to do or to believe (Johnston, 2003; McDonald, Corrigan, & Ward, 2002).
                                                                                                     7


2.2. The Recent Case Walkthrough

2.2.1. Protocol Notes

The Recent Case Walk-through is an abbreviated version of the Critical Decision Method, and is
primarily aimed at:

•   Bootstrapping the Analyst into the domain
•   Establishing rapport with the Participant

The method can also lead to the identification of potential leverage points, a tentative notion of
practitioner styles, or tentative ideas about other aspects of cognitive work.
                                                                        8


2.2.2. Template

                                "The Recent Case Walkthrough"


Interviewer
Participant
Start time
Finish time

                                          Instructions


Please walk me through your most recent problem.

When was it?

What were the goals you had to achieve?

What did you do, step by step?



                                           Narrative


(enlarge this cell as needed)




                                          Build a timeline

         TIME                                              EVENT


                          (Duplicate and expand these rows as needed)




                                     Revise the Timeline
                                                                                                  9


Instructions:
Now let's go over this timeline. I'd like you to suggest corrections and additions.




              Time                                                 Event

                                 (Duplicate and expand these rows as needed)




                                           Deepening

Instructions:
Now I'd like to go through this time line a step at a time and ask some questions.


Information    What information did you need or use to make this judgment?
               Where did you get this information?
               What did you do with this information?


Mental         As you went through the process of understanding this situation, did you build a
Modeling       conceptual of the problem scenario?
               Did you try to imagine the important causal events and principles?
               Did you make a spatial picture in your head?
               Can you draw me an example of what it looks like?


Knowledge      In what ways did you rely on your knowledge of this sort of case?
Base           How did this case relate to typical cases you have encountered?
               How did you use your knowledge of typical patterns?


Guidance       At what point did do you look at any sort of guidance?
               Why did you look at the guidance?
               How did you know if you could trust the guidance?
               How do you know which guidance to trust?
               Did you need to modify the guidance?
               When you modify the guidance, what information do you need or use?
               What do you do with that information?


Legacy         What forms do you have to complete or specific products you have to produce?
                                                                   10


Procedures

                                       Deepening Form

 Timeline                Probe                          Response
  Entry

             (Duplicate and expand these rows
                        as needed)
                                                                                              11


2.3. The Knowledge Audit

2.3.1. Template

                                   "The Knowledge Audit"

Interviewer
Participant
Start time
Finish time


Your work involves a need to analyze cases in great detail. But we know that experts are also able to
maintain a sense of the "big picture." Can you give me an example of what is important about the big
picture for (your, this) task? What are the major elements you have to know and keep track of?


                                    (Expand these rows, as needed)


When you are conducting (this) task, are there ways of working smart, or accomplishing more with
less--ways that you have found especially useful?




What are some examples when you have improvised on this task, or noticed an opportunity to do
something more quickly or better, and then followed up on it?"




Have there been times when the data or the equipment pointed in one direction, but your own judgment
tells you to do something else? Or when you had to rely on experience to avoid being led astray by
equipment or the data?




Can you think of a situation when you realized to that you had change what you were doing in order to
get the job done?




Can you recall an instance where you spotted a deviation from the norm or recognized that something
                                                                                              12


was amiss?




Have you ever had experiences where part of a situation just "popped" out at you?--a time when you
walked into a situation and knew exactly how things got there and where they were headed?




Experts are able to detect cues and see meaningful patterns that novices cannot see. Can you tell me
about a time when you predicted something that others did not, or where you noticed things that others
did not catch? Were you right? Why (or why not)?




Experts can predict the unusual. I know this happens all the time, but my guess is that the more
experience you have, the more accurate your seemingly unusual judgments become. Can you remember
a time when you were able to detect that something unusual happened?
                                                                                              13


2.4. Client Interviews

2.4.1. Protocol Notes

The "clients" are the individuals or organizations that use the products that come from the
domain practitioners (or their organizations). For example, new technologies might be designed
to assist weather forecasters (who would be the "end-users" of the systems) whose job it is to
produce forecasts to assist aviators. The aviators would be the "clients."

One might make a great tool to help weather forecasters, but it if does not help the forecasters
help their clients, it may end up an instance of how good intentions can lead to hobbled
technologies.

For many projects in which CTA plays a role, it is important to identify Client's needs (for
information, planning, decision-making, etc.), and understand the differing needs and
requirements of different Clients.

                                          Some “Tips”


Keep an eye out for inadequacies in the standard forms, formats, and procedures used in the User-
Client exchanges. Keep an eye out for adaptation (including local kluges and work-arounds).

It can be useful to use Knowledge Audit probes in the Client Interviews. One need not use all of
the probe questions that are included in the Template, below.
                                                                                           14


2.4.2. Template

                                      "Client Interviews"

Analyst:
Participant
Date
Start time
Finish time
Participant Age
Participant Job
designation (or duty
assignment), and
title (or rank)

How many years have you been ___________________ ?
What kinds of projects have you been involved in?



                                  (Expand the cells, as needed)



Have you had any training in (provider's domain)?




What is the range of experience you have had at (provider's domain or products)?




What is your current (job/project)?




Can you give me an example of a project where (provider information/services/products) had a
                                                                                                    15


big impact?




Can you give me an example of a project where the provider's (products/information/services)
made a big difference in success or failure?




What is it that you like about the provider's (products/information/services) that is provided to
you?




Can you give me an example of a project where you were highly confident in the provider's
(products/services/information)?




Can you give me an example of a project where you were highly skeptical of the provider's
(products/services/information)?




How do you use the provider's (products/services/information) during your projects?




Have you ever been in a situation where you felt that you understood the (provider's domain)
better than the provider?
                                                                                              16




Have you ever felt that you needed a kind of (product/service/information) that you are not
given?




In your opinion, what characterizes a good provider?




What is the value of having providers who are highly skilled?




Can you think of any things you could do to help the providers get better?
                                                                                                 17


                   3. Proficiency Scaling Methods Protocols and Templates


3.1. General Introduction

The psychological and sociological study of interpersonal judgments and attributions dates to the
early days of both fields (e.g., Thorndike, 1918; see Mieg, 2001). In the past two decades, the
areas of “Knowledge Elicitation” and “Expertise Studies” have been focused specifically on
proficiency scaling, primarily for the purpose of identifying experts. The rich understanding of
expert-level knowledge and reasoning provides a "gold standard" for domain knowledge and
reasoning strategies. The rich understanding of journeymen, apprentices, and novices informs the
researcher concerning training needs, the adaptation of software systems to individual user
models, etc.

In parallel, the areas of the Sociology of Scientific Knowledge and Cognitive Anthropology,
have been focusing some effort on studies of work in the modern technical workplace and thus
have brought to bear methods of ethnography. This has also entailed the study of proficient skill.
This paradigm has been referred to as the study of "everyday cognition" and "cognition in the
wild" (Hutchins, 1995a,b; Lave, 1988; Scribner, 1984; Suchman, 1993). Researchers have
studied a great many domains of proficiency, including traditional farming methods used in Peru,
photocopier repair, the activities of military command teams, the social interactions of
collaborative teams of designers, financiers, climatologists, physicists, and engineers, and so on
(Collins, 1985; Cross, Christians, and Dorst, 1996; Fleck and Williams, 1996; Greenbaum and
Kyng, 1991; Hutchins, 1995; Lynch, 1991; Orr, 1985). Classic studies in this paradigm include:

    • Hutchins' studies of navigation (by both individuals and teams, by both culturally-
      traditional methods and modern technology-based methods) (1990) on the interplay of
      navigation tools and collaborative activity in maritime navigation,
    • Hutchins' (1995b) study of flight crew collaboration and team work,
    • Orr's study of how photocopier repair technicians acquire knowledge and skill by
      sharing their "war stories" with one another.
    • Lave's (1988) studies of traditional methods used in crafts such as tailoring, and the
      nature of skills used in everyday life (e.g., math skills used during supermarket
      shopping).

Research in the area of the "sociology of scientific knowledge" (e.g., Collins, 1997; Fleck and
Williams, 1996; Knorr-Cetina, 1981; Knorr-Cetina and Mulkay, 1983) also falls within this
paradigm, and has involved detailed analyses of science as it is practiced, e.g., the history of the
development of new lasers and of gravity wave detectors, the role of consensus in decisions
about what makes for proper practice, breakdowns in the attempt to transmit skill from one
laboratory to another, failures in science or in the attempt to apply new technology, etc.

In psychology and cognitive science, concern with the question of how to define expertise
(Hoffman, 1998) led to an awareness that determination of who is an expert in a given domain
can require its own empirical effort. In a proficiency scaling procedure, the researcher
determines a domain-and organizationally appropriate scale of proficiency levels. Proficiency
scaling is the attempt to forge a domain- and organizationally-appropriate scale for
distinguishing levels of proficiency. Some alternative methods are described in Table 3.1.
                                                                                                           18



Table 3.1. Some methods that can contribute data for the creation of a proficiency scale.

    Method                   Yield                                       Example

In-depth career     Ideas about breadth        Weather forecasting in the armed services, for instance,
interviews about    and depth of               involves duty assignments having regular hours and regular
education,          experience;                job or task assignments that can be tracked across entire
training, etc.      Estimate of hours of       careers. Amount of time spent at actual forecasting or
                    experience                 forecasting-related tasks can be estimated with some
                                               confidence (Hoffman, 1991).
Professional        Ideas about what it        The study of weather forecasters involved senior
standards or        takes for individuals to   meteorologists US National Atmospheric and
licensing           reach the top of their     Oceanographic Administration and the National Weather
                    field.                     Service (Hoffman, Coffey, and Ford, 2000). One participant
                                               was one of the forecasters for Space Shuttle launches;
                                               another was one of the designers of the first meteorological
                                               satellites.
Measures of         Can be used for            Weather forecasting is again a case in point since records
performance at      convergence on scales      can show for each forecaster the relation between their
the familiar        determined by other        forecasts and the actual weather. In fact, this is routinely
tasks               methods.                   tracked in forecasting offices by the measurement of
                                               "forecast skill scores" (see Hoffman and Trafton,
                                               forthcoming).
Social              Proficiency levels in      In a project on knowledge preservation for the electric
Interaction         some group of              power utilities (Hoffman and Hanes, 2003), experts at
Analysis            practitioners or within    particular jobs (e.g., maintenance and repair of large
                    some community of          turbines, monitoring and control of nuclear chemical
                    practice (Meig, 2000;      reactions, etc.) were readily identified by plant managers,
                    Stein, 1997)               trainers, and engineers. The individuals identified as experts
                                               had been performing their jobs for years and were known
                                               among company personnel as "the" person in their
                                               specialization: "If there was that kind of problem I'd go to
                                               Ted. He's the turbine guy."

If research or domain practice is predicated on any notion of expertise (e.g., a need to build a
new decision support system that will help experts but can also be used to teach apprentices),
then it is necessary to have some sort of empirical anchor on what it really means for a person to
be an "expert," say, or an "apprentice." A proficiency scale should be based on more than one
method, and ideally should be based on at least three. We refer to this as the “three legs of a
tripod.”

Social Interaction Analysis, the result of which is a sociogram, is perhaps the lesser known of the
methods. A sociogram, that represents interaction patterns between people (e.g., frequent
interactions), is used to study group clustering, communication patterns, and workflows and
processes. For Social Interaction Analysis, multiple individuals within an organization or a
community of practice are interviewed. Practitioners might be asked, for example, "If you have a
problem of type x, who would you go to for advice?" or they might be asked to sort cards
bearing the names of other domain practitioners into piles according to one or another skill
dimension or knowledge category.
                                                                                                  19


Hoffman, Ford and Coffey (2000) suggested that proficiency scaling for a given project should
be based on at least three of the methods listed in Table A.1. It is important to create a scale that
is both domain and organizationally-appropriate, and that considers the full range of proficiency.
A rule of thumb in psychology is that it takes 10 years of intensive practice to become an expert
(Ericsson, Charness, Feltovich, and Hoffman, 2005). Assuming six hours of concentrated
practice per day for 40 weeks per year, this would mean 12,000 hours of practice at domain
tasks. while convenient, such rules of thumb are just that, rules of thumb. in the project on
weather forecasting (Hoffman, Coffey and Ford, 2000), the proficiency scale distinguished three
levels: experts, journeymen, and apprentices, each of which was further distinguished by three
levels of seniority, up to the senior experts who has as much as 50,000 hours of practice and
experience at domain tasks.

Following Hoffman (1988; Hoffman, Shadbolt, Burton, and Klein, 1995; Hoffman, 1998) we
rely on a modern variation on the classification scheme used in the craft guilds (Renard, 1968).
                                                                                                      20

Table 3.2. Basic proficiency categories (adapted from Hoffman, 1998).

   Naive        One who is totally ignorant of a domain.
   Novice       Literally, someone who is new—a probationary member. There has been some
                (“minimal”) exposure to the domain.
   Initiate     Literally, someone who has been through an initiation ceremony—a novice who has
                begun introductory instruction.
 Apprentice     Literally, one who is learning—a student undergoing a program of instruction beyond
                the introductory level. Traditionally, the apprentice is immersed in the domain by
                living with and assisting someone at a higher level. The length of an apprenticeship
                depends on the domain, ranging from about one to 12 years in the craft guilds.
Journeyman      Literally, a person who can perform a day’s labor unsupervised, although working
                under orders. An experienced and reliable worker, or one who
                has achieved a level of competence. It is possible to remain at this level for life.
   Expert       The distinguished or brilliant journeyman, highly regarded by peers, whose judgments
                are uncommonly accurate and reliable, whose performance shows consummate skill
                and economy of effort, and who can deal effectively with certain types of rare or
                “tough” cases. Also, an expert is one who has special skills or knowledge derived from
                extensive experience with subdomains.
   Master       Traditionally, a master is any journeyman or expert who is also qualified to teach those
                at a lower level. Traditionally, a master is one of an elite group of experts whose
                judgments set the regulations, standards, or ideals. Also, a master can be that expert
                who is regarded by the other experts as being “the” expert, or the “real” expert,
                especially with regard to sub-domain knowledge.

This is useful first step, in that it adds some explanatory weight to the category labels, but needs
refinement when actually applied in particular projects. In the weather forecasting project
(Hoffman, Coffey and Ford, 2000) it was necessary to refer to Senior and Junior ranks within the
expert and journeyman categories. (For details, see Hoffman, Trafton, and Roebber, 2009).

The Table entries fall a step short of being operational definitions. They are suggestive, however,
and this is where the specific methods of proficiency scaling come in: Career evaluations (hours
of experience, breadth and depth of experience), social evaluations and attributions (sociograms),
and performance evaluations.

Mere years of experience does not guarantee expertise, however. Experience scaling can also
involve an attempt to gauge the practitioners' breadth of experience—the different contexts or
sub-domains they have worked in, the range of tasks they have conducted, etc. Deeper
experience (i.e., more years at the job) affords more opportunities to acquire broader experience.
Hence, depth and breadth of experience should be correlated. But they are not necessarily
correlated, and so examination of both breadth and depth of experience is always wise.

Thus, one comes to a resolution that age and proficiency are generally related, that is, partially
correlated. This is captured in Table 3.3.
                                                                                                             21

Table 3.3. Age and proficiency are, generally speaking, partially correlated.

                                                      LIFESPAN
                 10                 20             30       40                     50            60

                                                                         Achievement of expertise in
Novice           Learning an commence at any age à à à                   significant domains may not be
                 (e.g., the school child who is avid about dinosaurs;    possible
                 the adult professional who undergoes job re-
                 training)


                 Individuals less                                                         Achievement of
Intern and       than18yrs of age                                                         expertise in
Apprentice       are rarely                                                               significant
                 considered       Can commence at any age à             à      à          domains may not
                 appropriate as                                                           be possible
                 Apprentices

                                  It is possible   Is typically achieved in mid- to late-20s, but
                                  to achieve       development may go no further
Journeyman                        journeyman
                                  status (e.g.,
                                  chess,
                                  computer
                                  hacking,
                                  sports)

                                  It is possible to        Most typical for 35 yrs of age and beyond
Expert                            achieve expertise
Stage                             (e.g., chess, computer
                                  hacking, sports)

Master                                Is rarely achieved   It is possible to       Most typical of seniors
Stage                                 early in a career    achieve mid-
                                                           career


To summarize, a rich understanding of expert-level knowledge and reasoning provides a "gold
standard" for domain knowledge and reasoning strategies. The rich understanding of
journeymen, apprentices, and novices informs the researcher concerning training needs, the
adaptation of software systems to individual user models, etc.

A number of CTA methods can support the process of proficiency scaling. Proficiency scaling is
the attempt to forge a domain- and organizationally-appropriate scale for distinguishing levels of
proficiency. A proficiency scale can be based on:

   1. Estimates of experience extent, breadth, and depth based on results from a Career
      Interview,
   2. Evaluations of performance based on performance measures,
   3. Ratings and skill category sortings from a sociogram.
                                                                                               22



If research is predicated on any notion of expertise (e.g., a need to build a new decision support
system that will help experts but can also be used to teach apprentices), then it is necessary to
have some sort of empirical anchor on what it really means for a person to be an "expert," say, or
an "apprentice." Ideally, a proficiency scale will be based on more than one method.
                                                                                                23


3.2. Career Interviews

3.2.1. General Protocol Notes

Important things the Interviewer needs to accomplish:
   • Convey respect for the Participant for their job and the contribution their job represents.
   • Convey respect for the Participant for their skill level and accomplishments.
   • Convey a desire to help the Participant by learning about their goals and concerns.
   • Mitigate any concerns that the Participant might have that the Interviewer is there to
       finger-point or disrupt the work, or broker people's agendas.
   • Prove that the Interviewer has done some homework, and knows something about the
       Participant’s domain.

Important things the Interviewer needs to learn:
   • What it takes for a practitioner in the domain to achieve expertise.
   • The range of kinds of experience (breadth and depth) that characterize the most highly-
       experienced practitioners.

Acquire a copy of the participant's vita or resume and append it to the interview data.

Selection of Participants can depend on a host of factors, ranging from travel and availability
issues to any need or requirement there might be to identify and interview experts. Whatever the
criteria or constraints, it is generally useful to interview personnel who represent a range of job
assignments, levels of experience, and levels of “local” knowledge. In most CTA procedures, it
is necessary to have at least some Participants who conduct domain tasks on a daily basis. In
most CTA procedures it is highly valuable to have Participants who can talk openly about their
processes and procedures, seem to love their jobs, and have had sufficient experience to have
achieved expertise at using the newest technologies that are in the operational context.




                                         Lesson Learned

Practitioners who are verbally fluent and who seem to love their domain can sometimes be too
talkative and can jump around story-telling and getting off on tangents, especially since in some
cases they rarely have opportunities to talk about their domain and their experiences to
interested listeners. They sometimes need to be kept on track by saying, e.g., "that's an
interesting story—let's come back to that…"
                                                                                                  24


                                          Some “Tips”


•   Until or unless each interviewer has achieves sufficient skill or has had sufficient practice
    with Participants in the domain at hand, interviews should be conducted by pairs of
    interviewers, who take separate notes.
•   Expect that the interview guides will have to be revised, even several times, during the
    course of the data collection phase.
•   Think twice about audiotape recording the interviews—it can take a great deal of time to
    transcribe and code the data.
•   For interviews that are audio recorded, do not conduct the interview in a room with ANY
    background noise (e.g., air conditioners, equipment, etc.) as this will significantly degrade
    the quality of the recordings. Consider using a y-connector allowing input from two lapel
    microphones, one clipped to the collar of the Participant, one to the collar of the
    Interviewer.
•   After the recorder is started, preface it with a clear statement of the day, date, time,
    Participant name, and Researcher name, project name, and interview type.
•   Be sure to ask the Participant to speak clearly and loudly.



It is often valuable, and sometimes necessary, to attempt to determine how much time a
Participant has spent engaged in activities that arguably fall within the domain. One might focus
on the amount of time the Participant has spent at some single activity. For instance, how much
time do weather forecasters spend trying to interpret at infra-red satellite images? One might
focus on something broader, such as how much time a forecaster has spent engage in all
forecasting-related activities.

The rule of thumb from expertise studies is that to qualify as an expert one must have had 10
years full time experience. Assuming 40 hours per week and 40 weeks per year, this would
amount to 16,000 hours. Another rule of thumb, based on studies of chess, is 10,000 hours of
task experience (Chase and Simon, 1973). These rules of thumb will in all likelihood not apply in
many applied research contexts. For instance, in the weather forecasting case study (Hoffman,
Coffey, and Ford, 2000), the most senior expert forecasters had logged in the range of 40,000-
50,000 hours of experience. The experience scale must always be appropriate for the domain, but
also appropriate for and the particular organizational context.

When retrospecting about their education, training, and career experiences, the reflective
Participant will recall details, but there will be some gaps and uncertainties. One strategy that has
proven useful is to apply the “Gilbreth Correction Factor,” which is simply the estimated total
divided by two. In his classic "time and motion" studies of the details of various jobs, Gilbreth
(1911, 1914) found that the amount of time people spend at tasks that are directly work-related is
about half of the amount of time they spend "on the job." Gilbreth also found if the schedule of
work and rest periods could be made, as we would say today, more human-centered, that work
output could double. Gilbreth studied tasks that had a major manual component (e.g., the
assembly of radios), the "factor of 2" kept cropping up again (e.g., estimated time savings if a bin
holding a part could be moved closer to the worker). The GCF serves as a reasonable enough
anchor, a conservative estimate of time-on-task, in comparison to the raw estimate from the
Career Interview, which may be likely to be an over-estimate. Research in a number of domains
                                                                                                25


has shown that even with the GCF applied, estimates of time spent at domain tasks by the most
senior practitioners often fall well above the 10,000 hour benchmark set for the achievement of
expertise (see Hoffman and Lintern, 2005).

Mere years of experience does not guarantee expertise, however. Experience scaling also
involves an attempt to gauge the practitioners' breadth of experience—the different contexts or
sub-domains they have worked in, the range of tasks they have conducted, etc. Deeper
experience (i.e., more years at the job) affords more opportunities to acquire broader experience.
Hence, depth and breadth of experience should be correlated. But they are not necessarily
correlated, and so examination of both breadth and depth of experience is always wise.

Thus, one comes to a resolution that age and proficiency are generally related. This is captured in
Table 3.2.
                                                                                                             26

Table 3.2. Age and proficiency are, generally speaking, partially correlated.

                                                      LIFESPAN
                 10                 20             30       40                     50            60

                                                                         Achievement of expertise in
Novice           Learning an commence at any age à à à                   significant domains may not be
                 (e.g., the school child who is avid about dinosaurs;    possible
                 the adult professional who undergoes job re-
                 training)


                 Individuals less                                                         Achievement of
Intern and       than18yrs of age                                                         expertise in
Apprentice       are rarely                                                               significant
                 considered       Can commence at any age à             à      à          domains may not
                 appropriate as                                                           be possible
                 Apprentices

                                  It is possible   Is typically achieved in mid- to late-20s, but
                                  to achieve       development may go no further
Journeyman                        journeyman
                                  status (e.g.,
                                  chess,
                                  computer
                                  hacking,
                                  sports)

                                  It is possible to        Most typical for 35 yrs of age and beyond
Expert                            achieve expertise
Stage                             (e.g., chess, computer
                                  hacking, sports)

Master                                Is rarely achieved   It is possible to       Most typical of seniors
Stage                                 early in a career    achieve mid-
                                                           career
                                                                       27


3.2.2. Template

                                     "Career Interviews"


Analyst:
Participant
Date
Start time
Finish time

Name

Age

Title or rank or job
designation or duty
assignment

High-school and college education


                                 (Expand these cells, as needed)


Early interest in this domain?




Training/College/Graduate Studies




Post-Schoolhouse Experience




                        Attempt To Estimate Hours Spent At The Tasks
                                                                  28




                                          EXPERIENCE

  WHERE             WHEN                       WHAT        TIME

                                For each task/activity:
                                Number of hours per day
                                Number of days per week
                                Number of weeks per year




                                TOTAL



                                             Notes

Determination:

Qualification on the Determination:

Notes on Salient experiences and skills
                                                                                                  29


3.3. Sociometry


3.3.1. General Protocol Notes

In the field of psychology there is a long history of studies attempting to evaluate interpersonal
judgments of abilities and competencies (e.g., Thorndike, 1920). In recent times this, has
extended to research on the extent to which expert judgments of the competencies of other
experts conform to evidence from experts’ retrospections about previously-encountered critical
incidents, and the extent to which competency judgments, and competencies shown in incident
records, can be used to predict practitioner performance (McClelland, 1998).

In the field of advertising there has been a similar thread, focusing on perceptions of the
expertise of individuals who endorse products, and the relations of those perceptions to
judgments of product quality and intention to purchase (e.g., Ohanian, 1990).

There is a similar thread in the field of sociology. Sociometry is a branch of sociology in which
attempts are made to measure social structures and evaluate them in terms of the measures.
Psychiatrist Jacob Moreno first put the idea of a “sociogram” forward in the 1930s (see Fox,
1987) as a proposal of a means for measuring and visualizing interpersonal relations within
groups.

In the context of cognitive task analysis and its applications, Sociometry involves having domain
practitioners make evaluative ratings about other domain practitioners. (see Stein, 1992, 1997).
The method is simple to use, especially in the work setting. In its simplest form (see Stein, 1992,
Appendix 2), the sociogram is a one-page form on which the participant simply checks off the
names of other individuals from who the participant obtains information or guidance.

Stein (1992, Appendix 2) provides guidance on using techniques from social network analysis in
the analysis of sociometric data (e.g., how to calculate who is “central” in a communication
network).

Results from a sociogram can include information that can be useful in proficiency scaling,
leverage point identification, and even cognitive modeling. They can be useful in exploring
hypotheses about expertise attributions and communication patterns within organizations. For
instance, one study (Stein, 1992) in a particular organization found that the number of years
individuals had been in an organization correlated with the frequency with which they were
approached as an information resource. However, the individual who was most often approached
for information was not the individual with the most years in the organization.

A sociogram can be designed for use with practitioners who know one another and work together
(e.g., as a team, within an organization, etc.) or it can be designed for use in the study of a
“community of practice” in which each practitioner knows something about many others,
including others with whom the practitioner has not worked.

Most sociograms, like social network analyses, focus on a single relation: Whom do you trust?
From whom to you get information? With whom do you meet? And so on. There is no
principled reason why a sociogrammetric interview, in the context of cognitive task analysis,
might ask about a variety of social factors that contribute to proficiency attributions. The listings
                                                                                                30


of possible sociogram probe questions we present here is intended to illustrate a range of
possibilities.

Questions in sociograms can ask for self-other comparisons in terms of knowledge and
experience level, in terms of reasoning styles, in terms of ability, in terms of subspecialization,
etc. On those same topics, questions in a sociogram can ask about patterns of consultation and
advice-seeking.

Questions in a sociogram can involve a numerical ratings task, or a task involving the sorting of
cards with practitioner names written upon them.

The template we present is intended as suggestive. A sociogram need not precisely follow the
guidance that we present here. Questions can be combined in many ways, as appropriate to the
goals of the research and other pertinent project constraints.

Asking practitioners who work together in an organization to make comparative ratings of one
another can be socially awkward and can have negative repercussions. The Participant needs to
feel that they can present their most honest and candid judgments while at the same time
preserving confidentiality and anonymity. A solution is to have the Researcher who facilitates
the interview procedure remain “blind” to the name and identity of the co-worker(s) that the
Participant is rating.

Ideally, before the sociogram is conducted, the Researchers already have some idea of who the
experts in an organization are. Ideally, the sociogram should involve all of the experts as well as
journeyman and apprentices.

If the number of participants to be involved in a sociogram is greater than about seven, the
conduct of a full Sociogram can become tedious for the Participant. (A glance ahead will show
that each of the sociograms involves having each Participant answer a number of questions about
each of the other Participants).

One solution to this problem is to have each Participant conduct the sociogram for only a subset
of the other Participants, with the constraint that each participant is assessed by at least two
others. Another solution is to divide the pool of Participants into two sets, conduct the
sociograms within each of the two sets, and then randomly select n Participants from set 1 and n
Participants from set 2, and conduct another sociogram in which they rate individuals whom they
had not rated in the first sociogram. Ideally, the same proficiency scale assignments should arise
out of the converging data sets.

As for all of the Templates we present, we suggest that the first page of the sociogram data
collection form include the following:




3.3.2. General Forms Templates
                                                                   31


Interviewer

Participant

Date

Start time

Finish time


For Within-Group Sociograms

We would like to ask you some questions regarding:

                                (Name or ID number)

How long (months, years) have you known/worked with one another?
                                                                                                               32


3.3.3. Ratings Scale Items

We would now like you to answer a set of specific questions that use a numerical rating scale.

Please utilize the full range of the scale.

Do not hesitate to say things that reflect either positively or negatively on you or your
colleagues.

We are not here to point fingers, or challenge anyone’s skill or authority.

All the data we collect will remain anonymous and confidential. That is, no one’s name will be
associated with particular results.

Please be open, honest, and candid.


Compared to you, what is their level or extent of experience? Check one of the boxes below.

They have had   They have had   They have had   Our levels of    They have had   They have had     They have had
much more       more            somewhat        experience are   somewhat less   less experience     much less
experience      experience      more            about the same                                      experience
                                experience
      7               6               5               4                3               2                1

Comments
                                      (Expand the cells, as needed)


Compared to your own knowledge of your domain, what is their level of knowledge? Check
one of the boxes below.

They know       They know       They know       Our levels of    They know       They know less    They know
much more       more            somewhat        knowledge are    somewhat less                     much less
                                more            about the same
      7               6               5               4                3               2                1

Comments




Compared to your level of ability at conducting your domain tasks, what is their level of
                                                                                                                      33


ability? Check one of the boxes below.

 Their work is    Their work is     Their work is   Their work is     Their work is    Their work is     Their work is
 consistently     usually better     often better   about as good      often not as    usually not as   consistently not
    better                                             as mine             good            good            as good

      7                 6                 5               4                 3                2                 1

Comments



Is s/he good at particular tasks within your domain than others?                   What types?

_____________________________________________________________________

_____________________________________________________________________

Compared to your level of ability at conducting those kinds of tasks, what is their ability level?
Circle one of the numbers below

 Their work is    Their work is     Their work is   Their work is     Their work is    Their work is     Their work is
 consistently     usually better     often better   about as good      often not as    usually not as   consistently not
    better                                             as mine             good            good            as good

      7                 6                 5               4                 3                2                 1

Comments



Compared to your level of ability at rapidly integrating data and quickly sizing up a situation,
what is their level of ability? Check one of the boxes below.

Much greater     Greater skill     Moderately       About the same   Somewhat         Lower skill       Much lower
skill                              greater skill    skill level as   lower skill                        skill
                                                    me
      7                 6                 5               4                 3                2                 1

Comments




Compared to the general accuracy of your own products or results, what is the general accuracy
of their products or results? Check one of the boxes below.
                                                                                                                                   34



 Much greater        Greater           Moderately       About the same          Somewhat              Lower           Much lower
                                        greater            as mine                lower
      7                   6                 5                     4                 3                  2                   1

Comments



Compared to your own degree of ability at communicating about your domain with others, what
is their level of ability? Check one of the boxes below.

Much greater    Greater skill    Moderately         About the         Somewhat          Lower skill        Much lower skill
skill                            greater skill      same skill        lower skill
                                                    level as me       level
     7                6                 5                 4                 3                  2                       1

Comments



Using traditional craft guild terminology, what would you say is their degree of expertise?
Circle one of the numbers below.

       Master                     Expert               Journeyman                    Apprentice                       Initiate
Sets the standards        Highly competent,         Can work                    Needs guidance or             Still shows a need
for performance in        accurate, and             competently without         supervision; shows a          for needs formal
the profession.           skillful. Has             supervision or              need for experience           training.
                          specialized skills.       guidance.                   and on-the-job
                                                                                training, but also
                                                                                some need for
                                                                                additional formal
                                                                                training.

          1                        2                              3                        4                           5

Comments




                                        Working Style
What seems to be their “style" of reasoning or working? Can you place them somewhere on the
continuum below? Use a check mark
                                                                                                 35



Understand the domain events                                 They conduct their work on the basis
as a dynamic causal system;                                  of standard procedures, checklists,
form conceptual models of                                    etc. rather than a deep understanding
what’s going on.                                             of the domain


         ß--------------------------------------------------------------------à
Comments



                           Reflective Practitioner or Journeyman?
What seems to be their “style" of reasoning or working? Can you place them somewhere on the
continuum below? Use a check mark.

Are reflective, and question                               Do not seem to be deep a thinker. They
their own reasoning and                                    do not think about their own reasoning
assumptions, and are even                                  or question their strategies or
critical of their own ideas.                               assumptions.



        ß--------------------------------------------------------------------à
Comments



                                     Leader or Follower?
What seems to be their “style" of reasoning or working? Can you place them somewhere on the
continuum below? Use a check mark

Are they one of the visionaries                                They seem to refine and extend the
or innovators?                                                 pathfinding ideas of others.



        ß--------------------------------------------------------------------à
Comments
                                                                                                              36


3.3.4. Sorting Task Items

                                           Experimenter's Protocol


Participant is invited to write the names of 12 domain practitioners on 3x5 cards.

Names can be selected by instruction or by Participant choice.
“People whose names come to mind, people you know or know of.”
“People you have worked with.”
“People who represent a range of experience in the field.”

A card bearing the Participant’s own name can be added into the pile of cards.



Using traditional craft guild terminology, what would you say is their degree of expertise? Sort
into piles.

      Master                Expert              Journeyman             Apprentice                Novice

Sets the standards   Highly competent,        Can work              Needs guidance or      Still shows a need
for performance in   accurate, and            competently without   supervision; shows a   for formal training.
the profession.      skillful. Has            supervision or        need for experience
                     specialized skills.      guidance.             and on-the-job
                                                                    training, but also
                                                                    some need for
                                                                    additional formal
                                                                    training.

Comments
                                                                                               37



Place the cards into two piles, according to these two general styles.

          “Reflective Practitioner”                               “Proceduralist”

They understand the domain at a deep              They conduct their work on the basis of
conceptual level.                                 standard procedures and have a superficial
They understand the important issues.             rather than a deep understanding of the
                                                  domain. They do not seem to care much about
                                                  underlying or outstanding issues.

Comments




For each name, note any specialization or specialized areas of subdomain knowledge or skill.

Comments




Who are the real pathfinders or founders of the field? Sort into piles.

         Founders and pathfinders                   Those who refine and extend the seminal
                                                                ideas of others

Comments




Who would you say are the real visionaries in the field? Sort into piles.

                  Visionaries                              Those who refine and extend
                                                       the innovations and visions of others

Comments
                                                                                                    38



Compared to you, what is their level of skill at conducting domain procedures? Sort into piles.

Much higher skill     Higher skill       About the same         Less skill        Much less skill
                                             as me
Comments




Compared to you, what is their level or extent of experience? Sort into piles.

   Much more        More experience      About the same     Less experience         Much less
   experience                               level of                                experience
                                        experience as me
Comments




Compared to your own knowledge of your domain or field, what is their level of knowledge?
Sort into piles.

They know much      They know more        Our levels of      They know less      They know much
     more                                knowledge are                                 less
                                         about the same

Comments




Compared to the general quality or accuracy of your own products or results, what is the
general quality or accuracy of their products or results?

     Greater           Somewhat          About the same      Somewhat less             Less
                        greater             as mine
Comments




Compared to your own degree of ability at communicating about your field both to people
                                                                                                  39


within the field and those outside of the field, what is their level of ability?

  Much greater         Greater skill       About the same         Lower skill      Much lower skill
                                           skill level as me
Comments
                                                                                               40


3.3.5. Communications Patterns Items

       3.3.5.1. Within-Groups, Teams, or Organizations

We would like to ask you some questions regarding:

                                       (Name or ID number)

How long (months, years) have you known/worked with one another?




How often do you collaborate in the conduct of tasks?

How often do you conduct separate tasks, but at the same time?

How many times in the last month have you gone to them for guidance or an opinion
concerning the interpretation of data? (If “rarely” or “never,” is this because of rank?)

Does s/he ever come to YOU for guidance or an opinion?

How many times in the last month have you gone to them for guidance or an opinion
concerning the understanding of causes or events?

How many times in the last month have you gone to them for guidance or an opinion
concerning the equipment you use or the operations you perform using the technology?

If “rarely” or “never,” is this because of rank or status?

Does s/he ever come to YOU for guidance or an opinion?

How many times in the last month have you gone to them for guidance or an opinion
concerning organizational operations and procedures? (If “rarely” or “never,” is this because of
rank?)

Does s/he ever come to YOU for guidance or an opinion?
                                                                                  41


       3.3.5.2. Within-Domains

Who in the field of ______________________________________ has come to you for
guidance or an opinion?

On what topics or issues has your opinion been solicited?


Do you know of_________________________________________?


How do you know of _____________________________________?


Do you personally know ___________________________________?


If so, how long have you known _____________________________?


Have you worked or collaborated in any way with ______________________________?


Have you gone to them for guidance or an opinion?


Does s/he ever come to you for guidance or an opinion?
                                                                                                 42


3.4. Cognitive Styles Analysis


3.4.1. Introduction

In any given domain, one should expect to find individual differences in skill level, but also such
things as motivation and style. Different practitioners prefer work problems in different ways at
different points, for any of a host of reasons.

Proficiency and style can be related in many ways. Proficiency can be achieved via differing
styles. Proficiency can be exercised via differing styles. On the other hand, proficiency takes
time to achieve and thus the styles that characterize experts should be at least partly coincident
with skill level.

The analysis of cognitive styles, as a part of Proficiency Scaling, can be conducted with reliance
on more than one perspective. Ideas concerning cognitive style come from:


   •   The proficiency scale of the craft guilds. Cognitive style can be evaluated from the
       perspective that style is partly correlated with skill level. Some designations and
       descriptions are presented in Table 3.3.

   •   Experiences of applied researchers who have conducted CTA procedures, and research in
       the paradigm of Naturalistic Decision Making (Reference). Some styles designations and
       descriptions are presented in Table 3.4

The ideas presented in these Tables are offered as suggestions. The categorizations are not
intended to be inclusive or exhaustive—not all practitioners will fall neatly into one or another of
the categories. Any analysis of reasoning styles will have to be crafted so as to be appropriate to
the domain at hand. Any given project may find itself in need of these, some of these, or other
appropriate designations.
                                                                                                    43

Table 3.3. Likely reasoning style as a function of skill level. (For the definitions of the levels, see
Table 3.1.)

                           Low Skill Levels (Naïve, Initiate, Novice)

•   Their performance standards focus on satisfying literal job requirements.
•   They rely too much on the guidance (e.g., out puts of computer models), and take the
    guidance at
•   They use a single strategy or a fixed set of procedures--they conduct tasks in a highly
    proceduralized manner using the specific methods taught in the schoolhouse.
•   Their data-gathering efforts are limited but they tend to say that they look at everything.
•   They do not attempt to link everything together in a meaningful way—they do not form
    visual, conceptual models or does not spend enough time forming and refining models.
•   They are reactive, and "chase the observations."
•   They are insensitive to contextual factors or local effects.
•   They cannot do multi-tasking without suffering from overload, becomes less efficient and
    more prone to error.
•   They are uncomfortable when there is any need to improvise.
•   They are unaware of situations in which data can be misleading, and do not adjust their
    judgments appropriately.
•   They are less adroit.
•   Things that are difficult for them to do are easy for the expert.
•   They are less aware of actual needs of the end-users.
•   They are not strategic opportunists.


                        Medium Skill Levels (Apprentice, Journeyman)

•   Despite motivation, it is possible to remain at this level for life and not progress to the
    expert level.
•   They begin by formulating the problem but then like individuals at the Low Skill Levels,
    those at the Medium Skill Levels tend to follow routine procedures—they tend to seek
    information in a proceduralized or routine way, following the same steps every time.
•   Some time is spent forming a mental model.
•   Their reasoning is mostly at the level of individual cues, some ability to recognize cue
    configurations within and across data types.
•   They tend to place great reliance on the available guidance.
•   They tend to treat guidance as a whole, and not look to sub-elements—they focus on
    determining whether the guidance is "right" or "wrong."
•   Journeymen can issue a competent product without supervision but both Apprentices and
    Journeymen have difficulty with tough or unfamiliar scenarios.
                                                                                                         44



                                High Skill Levels (Expert, Master)

•   They have high personal standards for performance.
•   Their process begins by achieving a clear understanding of the problem situation.
•   They are always skeptical of guidance and know the biases and weakness of each of the various
    guidance products.
•   They look at agreement of the various types of guidance--features or developments on which the
    guidances agree.
•   They are flexible and inventive in the use of tools and procedures, i.e., the conduct action sequences
    based on a reasoned selection among action sequence alternatives.
•   They are able to take context and local effects into account.
•   They are able to adjust data in accordance with data age.
•   They are able to take into account data source location.
•   They do not make wholesale judgments that guidance is either "right" or "wrong."
•   They reason ahead of the data.
•   They can do multi-tasking and still conduct tasks efficiently without wasting time or resources.
•   They are comfortable improvising.
•   They can tell when equipment or data or data type is misleading; know when to be skeptical.
•   They create and use strategies not taught in school.
•   They form visual, conceptual models that depict causal forces.
•   They can use their mental model to quickly provide information they are asked for.
•   Things that are difficult for them to do may be either very difficult for the novice to do, or may be
    cases in which the difficulty or subtleties go totally unrecognized by the novice.
•   They can issue high-quality products for tough as well as easy scenarios.
•   They provide information of a type and format that is useful to the client.
•   They can shift direction or attention to take advantage of opportunities.
                                                                                                        45

Table 3.4. Some Cognitive Styles Designations (based on Pliske, Crandall, and Klein, 2000).

                                             SCIENTIST
The "reflective practitioner" Thinks about their own strategies and reasoning, engages in "what if?"
reasoning, questions their own assumptions, and is freely critical of their own ideas.

                             They are often "lovers" of the domain.
              AFFECT         They like to experience domain events and watch patterns develop.
                             They are motivated to improve their understanding of the domain.
                             They are likely to act like a Mechanic when stressed or when problems are
                             easy.
STYLE                        They actively seek out a wide range of experience in the domain, including
                             experience at a variety of scenarios.
                             They show a high level of flexibility.
           ACTIVITIES        They spend proportionately more time trying to understand problems, and
                             building and refining a mental model.
                             They are most likely to be able to engage in recognition-primed decision-
                             making.
                             They spend relatively little time generating products since this is done so
                             efficiently.
                             They possess a high level of pattern-recognition skill.
CORRELATED SKILL             They possess a high level of skill at mental simulation.
 OR PROFICIENCY              They possess skill at using a wide variety of tools.
     LEVEL                   They understand domain events as a dynamic system.
                             Their reasoning is analytical and critical.
                             They possess an extensive knowledge base of domain concepts, principles
                             and reasoning rules.

                                          PROCEDURALIST
Seem to lack the intrinsic motivation to improve their skills and expand their knowledge, so they do not
move up to the next level. They do not think about their own reasoning or question their strategies or
assumptions. However, in terms of performance and/or experience, they are journeyman on the
proficiency scale.

                             They sometimes are lovers of the domain.
              AFFECT         They like to experience domain events and see patterns develop.
                             They are motivated to improve their understanding of the domain.
                             They spend proportionately less time building a mental model.
                             They engage in recognition-primed decision making less often.
STYLE                        They are proficient with the tools they have been taught to use.
           ACTIVITIES        They are less likely to understand domain events as a complex dynamic
                             system.
                             They see their job as having the goal of completing a fixed set of
                             procedures, although these are often reliant on a knowledge base.
                             They sometimes rely on a knowledge base of principles of rules, but this
                             tends to be limited to types of events they have worked on in the past.
CORRELATED SKILL             Typically, they are younger and less experienced.
 OR PROFICIENCY
     LEVEL


                                           MECHANIC
They conduct their work on the basis of standard procedures and have a superficial rather than a deep
                                                                                                       46

understanding of the domain. They do not seem to care much or wonder about underlying concepts or
outstanding issues.

                            They are not interested in knowing more than what it takes to do the job;
             AFFECT         not highly motivated to improve.
                            They are likely to be unaware of factors that make problems difficult.
STYLE                       They see their job as having the goal of completing a fixed set of
                            procedures, and these are often not knowledge-based.
           ACTIVITIES       They spend proportionately less time building a mental model.
                            They rarely are able to engage in recognition-primed decision making.
CORRELATED SKILL            They sometimes have years of experience.
 OR PROFICIENCY             They possess a limited ability to describe their reasoning.
     LEVEL                  They are skilled at using tools with which they are familiar, but changes in
                            the tools can be disruptive.


                                           DISENGAGED

The most salient feature is emotional detachment and disengagement with the domain or organization.

                            They do not like their job.
             AFFECT         They do not like to think about the domain.
                            They are very likely to be unaware of factors that make problems difficult.
STYLE                       They spend most of the time generating routine products or filling out
                            routine forms.
           ACTIVITIES       They spend almost no time building a mental model and proportionately
                            much more time examining the guidance.
                            They cannot engage in recognition-primed decision making.
CORRELATED SKILL            They possess a limited knowledge base of domain concepts, principles, and
 OR PROFICIENCY             reasoning rules.
     LEVEL                  Skill is limited to scenarios they have worked in the past.
                            Their products are of minimally acceptable quality.


In the Cognitive Styles analysis, the Researchers conduct a card-sorting task that categorizes the
domain Practitioners according to perceived cognitive style. The procedure presupposes that all
of the Researchers who will engage in the sorting task have had sufficient opportunity to interact
with each of the Participants (e.g., opportunistic, unstructured interviews, initial workplace
observations, etc.). The Researchers will have engaged in some interviews, perhaps unstructured
and opportunistic ones, with the domain Practitioners. That is, the Researchers will have
bootstrapped to the extent that they feel they have some idea of each Practitioner's style.

The result of the procedure is a consensus sorting of Practitioners according to a set of cognitive
styles. Individually, the styles should seem both appropriate and necessary. As a set, the styles
should seem appropriate and complete, at least complete with regard to the set's functionality in
helping the Researchers achieve the project purposes or goals.


3.4.2. Protocol For Cognitive Styles Analysis
                                                                                        47


1. The Analysis is conducted after the Researchers have become familiar with each of the
      domain practitioners who are serving as Participants in the project. That is, the
      Researchers have already had opportunities to discuss the domain with the
      Participants whose styles will be categorized.
2. The Researchers formulate a set of what seem to be reasonable and potentially useful
      styles categories, having short descriptive labels. These may be developed by the
      Researchers, or may be adapted from the listing provided in this doccument.
3. Each Practitioner's name is written on a file card. Working independently, all of the
      Researchers sort cards according to style.
4. The Researchers review and discuss each other's sorts. They converge on an agreed-upon
      set of categories and descriptive labels.
5. The Researchers re-sort. The Results are examined for consensus or rate of agreement.
6. The Researchers come to agreement that those Practitioners attributed the same style are
      similar with regard to the style definition.
7. The Researchers come to agreement that there are no Practitioners who seem to manifest
      more than one of the styles. That is, the final set of styles categories allows for a
      satisfactory partitioning of the set of Participants.
8. Steps 3-6 may be repeated.
                                                                                              48


3.4.3. Protocol for Emergent Cognitive Styles Analysis

A variation on this task involves having the Researchers conduct the sorting task without
worrying about creating any short descriptive labels for the perceived styles, and without
worrying about devising a clear description of the styles. The procedure lets the categories
"emerge" from the individual Researcher's perceptions and judgments without influence from a
set of pre-determined styles descriptors.

   1. Each Practitioner's name is written on a file card. Working independently, each of the
         Researchers deliberates concerning the style of each of the Practitioners,
   2. The Researchers sorts cards according to those judgments. An individual Practitioner
         may be in a category alone, or may fall in a category with one or more others.
   3. The Researchers review and discuss each other's sorts. They converge on an agreed-upon
         set of categories. These are expressed in terms of the theme or themes of each
         category.
   4. Working independently, the Researchers re-sort. The results are examined for consensus
         or rate of agreement.
   5. Only then are the categories are given descriptive labels.
   6. The Researchers confirm that those Practitioners attributed the same style are similar with
         regard to the style definition.
   7. The Researchers confirm that there are no Practitioners who seem to manifest more than
         one of the styles. That is, the final set of styles categories allows for a satisfactory
         partitioning of the set of Participants.
                                                                                                         49


3.4.4. Protocol for Cognitive Styles-Proficiency/Skill Levels Comparison

Another use of Cognitive Styles Analysis is to aid in proficiency scaling. In this use, Cognitive
Styles are compared to proficiency levels, since there should be some relations. For example, it
would be more likely to find that individuals who are potentially designated as expert in a
sociogram or a career interview or a performance evaluation would be more likely to manifest
the style of the "Reflective Practitioner" than that of the "Proceduralist."

Proficiency data for comparison to those from a Cognitive Styles Analysis can themselves come
from a sorting procedure.

   1. Working individually, the Researchers sort cards containing the names of the practitioners
         according to expertise level (see Table 4.1) or along a continuum.
   2. The Researchers compare each individual an individual in the next lowest level and an
         individual in the next highest level, to confirm the levels assignments.
   3. The Researchers compare the results of the Levels sort and the Styles sort to determine
          whether there is any consensus on a possible relation of style to skill level.


3.4.5. Validation

Researcher(s) who did not participate in the sorting task can be provided with the Styles categories' labels
and definitions and can engage in the styles sorting (and the skill levels comparison). Their styles sorting
should match the sorting arrived at in the final group consensus. Their skill levels sorting should affirm
the consensus on the relation of styles to skill level.
                                                                                                  50


                          4. Workplace Observations and Interviews


4.1. General Introduction

Workspace analysis can focus on:
  • The workspace in which groups work,
  • The spaces in which individuals work,
  • The activities in which workers engage,
  • The roles or jobs,
  • The requirements for decisions,
  • The requirements for activities,
  • The "standard operating procedures."

These alternative ways of looking at workplaces will overlap. For example, at a particular work
group, the activities might be identified with particular locations where particular individuals
work. Roles might be identified with particular work locations. And so on. The listing above is
not meant to be a complete, universal, or even consistent "slicing of the pie." Indeed, there is
considerable overlap in the Templates presented below. Our purpose in providing these
alternative ways of empirically investigating cognitive work is intended to suggest options.
Where appropriate, ideas from the Templates might be used, or combined in ways other than
those we present here.

It must be kept in mind that no observation is unobtrusive. In arguing for the advantages of so-
called unobtrusive observations, people sometimes assert that in the ideal case, the observer
should be like a "fly on the wall." The analogy is telling, because generally speaking when
someone is concentrating at work, a fly in the room, on the wall or otherwise, can be very
distracting.

The goal is not to capture behavior that has not been influenced in any way by the presence of
the Researcher/observer, but to capture authentic behavior on the part of the Worker. The
Researcher/observer is far more likely to observe authentic behavior if he or she has to some
extent already been accepted into the culture of the work than if he or she tries to be a "fly on the
fall." Acceptance means that the Workers regard the Researcher/observer as informed, sincere,
and oriented toward helping, and the Workers know that the Researcher/observer respects them
for their experience and skill.

This understanding of observational methods means that the possibilities for observation include
merging interviewing and observing. The analysis can be conducted with the assistance of an
informant, who accompanies the Researcher/observer and answers questions.

It should not be assumed that the Observations or Interviews should be limited to the categories
set out here. Furthermore, these generic categories may need to be modified to better fit the
given work domain. Nor should it be assumed that the Template probe questions presented here
are necessarily appropriate to the domain, organization, or workplace.

Finally, it should not be assumed that the probe questions presented in the Templates exhaust all
of the questions that might be appropriate to the domain, organization, or workplace.
                                                                                                    51


When probing concerning the deficiencies of a tool or workstation, the practitioner's initial
response to the probe may be meditative silence. Only with some patience and re-probing will
deficiencies be mentioned. Often, the practitioner will have discovered deficiencies but will not
have explicitly thought about them. Re-probing can focus on make-work, work-arounds, action
sequence alternatives, alternative displays, changes to the tool, etc. It is critical to ask about each
piece of equipment and technology—whether it is legacy, how it is used, what is good about it,
whether its use is mandated, etc.

As can be seen in the Templates, below, the Templates combine various probes in differing
ways. The two following tables provide an overview of the sorts of questions that are addressed,
looking across the alternative procedures and their Templates.

                                          Possible Probes

What sub-tasks or action sequences are involved in this activity?
What information does the practitioner need?
Where does the practitioner get this information?
What does the practitioner do with this information?
What forms have to be completed?
How does the practitioner recover when glitches cause problems?
How does the practitioner do work-arounds?
Is each piece of technology a legacy system or a mandated legacy system?



                                     Phenomena to Look For

    •   Multi-tasking and multiple distractions?
    •   Do procedures require preparation of reports having categories and descriptions with
        little meaning?
    •   Are the categories and descriptions really relevant to job effectiveness?
    •   Is the environment one in which it is hard to develop skill?
    •   Do task demands match with the equipment?
    •   Are apprentices or trainees overwhelmed?—have to work through tons of data?
    •   What circumstances induce conservativism?
    •   Do workers test their own processes so as to learn the extent of their capabilities?
    •   Do workers have leeway to make risky decisions of other forms of opportunities to
        benefit from learning?
    •   Does any mentoring occur? What are the opportunities, or the obstacles/impediments?
    •   Is their routine work (such as reporting functions) that have to be performed and detract
        from learning or understanding?
    •   Do tasks or duties force the worker to adopt one or another style or strategy?




The Roles Analysis and Locations analysis interviews are conducted for the purpose of
specifying work patterns at the social level (information-sharing) and at the individual level
(cognitive activities). To focus on Roles, the Participant is asked questions about each of the jobs
                                                                                                52


(duty assignments) that focus on the flow of information, such as "What information does this
person need?" and, "What does s/he do with the information?" To focus on Locations, the
Participant is asked questions about each of the tools (workstations), such as "What tasks are
conducted here?," What is the action sequence involved?" and, "What makes the task difficult?"

Workplace, Locations and Roles Analyses, Activities Observations, and SOP Analyses involve
variations on similar probe questions, but the purposes of the analyses can differ, even though all
can culminate in Decision Requirements Tables (DRTs) and/or Action Requirements Tables
(ARTs).

It is important that the Analyses be conducted in the work place, since artifacts in the workplace
can serve as contextual cues to both the Participant and the Researcher.

The Importance of Opportunism

Once the Work Place Map has been prepared, every time the researchers visit the workplace they
should bring with them a folder containing copies of the Work Place Map and also copies of the
Template for the Activities Observations. At any moment there may be an opportunity to take
notes about work patterns (e.g., information-sharing) or an observation that suggests leverage
point. For example, during the weather forecasting case study (Hoffman, Coffey, and Ford,
2000), there were a number of occasions where pilots and forecasters made comments that were
of use. On one occasion, a group of pilots was effectively stranded at the airfield due to
inclement weather, and were gathered chatting in a hallway. This was taken as an opportunity to
conduct an informal and unplanned interview about weather impact on air operations.
                                                                                                53


4.2. Workspace Analysis



4.2.1. Protocol Notes

The main goal of this analysis is to create a detailed representation of the workspace, to inform
subsequent analyses of work patterns and work activities. The analysis consists "simply" of
creating a detailed map of the workplace. We use scare quotes because a detailed map, drawn to
scale, takes considerable care and attention to detail.

The effort includes:
• Photographing the workplace to any level of detail, including views of individual
   workspaces, photographs of physical spaces alone, photographs of individuals at work, and
   so on. The workplace should be photographed from a variety of perspectives. e.g., from the
   entranceways, from each desk or workstation looking toward the other desks, and so on. It is
   important to note all of the desks, individual worker's workplaces, the locations of cabinets,
   records, operating manuals, etc.

•   Creating preliminary sketches map of the workplaces that are subsequently used to create a
    refined map of the workplace, noting any special features that are pertinent to the research
    goals (e.g., locations of information resources, obstacles to communication, etc.).

One never knows beforehand what things in the work place may seem unimportant at first but
that may, in a later analysis, turn out to be very important. A detailed map and set of photographs
can be repeatedly referred to throughout the research program, and mined for details that are
likely to be missed at the time that the photographs and map are made. A simple device such as a
paper cutter or a jumbled pile of reference manuals could turn out in a later analysis to be an
important clue to aspects of the work.

Here are examples from the weather forecasting project (Hoffman, Coffey, and Ford, 2000):

    •   A particular workstation was adorned with numerous Post-It Notesã , serving as an
        indicator of user-hostility.
    •   One of the Participant interviews revealed information about problems forecasters were
        having with a particular software system. Subsequently, the photographs were examined
        and revealed that the forecasters had applied a relatively large number of Post-It Notes at
        the workstation, confirming the interview statements.
    •   Interviews with Participating expert forecasters revealed that some of them had kept files
        of hardcopies of images and other data regarding tough cases of forecasting that they had
        encountered. Using the workplace map, the researchers were able to create a second map
        showing the locations of the information resources, which in turn could be used in the
        study of work patterns.
    •   Photographs of the workplace showing the Participants at work showed how forecasters
        provided information to pilots, and revealed obstacles to communication and ways in
        which the workspace layout was actually a hindrance. The workplace was subsequently
        reconfigured.
                                                                                              54


The workplace map from the weather project is presented in the Figure 4.1 below. We present
this figure to illustrate the level of detail that can be involved.


Figure 4.1. An example workplace map.




Related to the importance of subtle indicators, and the importance of conducting a photographic
survey, it may be advisable to take photographs of the workplace be taken throughout the course
of the investigation, if not at planned periodic intervals. The complex sociotechnical workplace
is always a moving target, and changes made in the workplace can be important clues to the
nature of the work. For instance, in the course of conducting the weather forecasting case study,
the main forecasting workstation and its software were changed out completely.

Activities Observations, Roles analysis, Locations analysis, Decision Requirements analysis,
Action Requirements analysis, and SOP analysis can all rely on the workplace map, and in many
circumstances will rely heavily on it. See the comment above concerning opportunism.
                                                                                             55


4.3. Activities Observations


4.3.1. Protocol Notes

This simple and deceptively straight-forward protocol is for observing people at work. What is
not so simple or straight-forward is deciding on what to observe and how to record the
observations. This necessarily involves some sort of reasoned, specific, and functional means or
categorizing or labeling work activities.

Like the Workspace Analysis, this procedure does not involve interviewing. This distinguishes
Workspace Analysis and Activities Observations from the other Workplace Observations and
Interviews procedures, which combine an element of observing with an element of interviewing.


4.3.2. Template

                                  "Activities Observations"

Observer

Informant(s) (if any)

Date

Start time:

Finish time:


Observation Record

   Time                 Actor                                  Activities




                                        (Duplicate and expand the rows as needed.)
                                                                                                 56


4.4. Locations Analysis

This analysis looks at the work from the perspective of individual locations (desks, cubicles, etc.)
within the total workplace.


4.4.1. Template
                                    "Work Locations Analysis"

Researcher/Observer

Participant/Informant

Date

Start time:

Finish time:




                                 Instructions for the Participant

We would like to go through the workplace one work location at a time, and ask you some
questions about it. This may take some time and we need not rush through it in a single session.
Some of our questions may require a bit of thought. Feel free to take your time, and of course
ask any questions of us that come to mind.


                        (Expand the cells and duplicate this table, as needed.)

Work Space (desk, workstation)

Location (see Workspace Map)


Work Space Layout

(Researcher sketches or photographs)




Who works here?
                                                                                                  57



           Name                                              Notes




                             (Duplicate and expand the rows, as needed.)




Tools and Technologies

              Tool/Technologies                               Description, Uses, Notes




Role or activities that are enacted at the work space (Expand the cells and duplicate this table, as
needed.)

Activity


What are the goals of this activity?


What skills, knowledge, and experience are needed for successful accomplishment of this
activity?


What information is needed for successful accomplishment of this activity?


What about this work space makes the goal easy to achieve?


What about the work space makes the goal difficult to achieve?


Kluges and work-arounds
58
                                                                                             59


4.5. Roles Analysis


4.5.1. Protocol Notes

The analysis of Roles can be aided by keeping on hand the finished workplace map, but even
more important is to conduct the analysis in the workplace rather than outside of it.

For the Roles Analysis, a Participant/informant is asked about goals, tasks, needed knowledge,
and technology.

Finally, it should not be assumed that the probe questions presented in the Template exhaust all
of the questions that might be appropriate to the domain, organization, or workplace.
                                                                                              60


4.5.2. Template

                                "Roles (jobs, duty assignments)"

Researcher
Participant/
Informant
(if any)
Date
Start time
Finish time


                                Instructions for the Participant

We would like to go through the workplace one job assignment at a time and ask you some
questions about it. This may take some time and we need not rush through it in a single session.
Some of our questions may require a bit of thought. Feel free to take your time, and of course
ask any questions of us that come to mind.


Role (job, post, or duty assignment)


Goals


Tasks


Needed skills, knowledge, and experience.


What makes the job easy?


What makes the job difficult?
                                                                                            61


4.6. Decision Requirements Analysis


4.6.1. Protocol Notes

This procedure is an interview for workpatterns analysis, and is conducted using Template
Decision Requirements Tables (DRT) to provide interview structure.

For each DRT, the Participant is asked to confirm/flesh out the action sequence, confirm/flesh
out the specification of support and tools, confirm/flesh out the notes on information needs,
confirm/flesh out the notes on usability and usefulness, and to confirm/flesh out the notes on
deficiencies.

The Interviewer makes notes right on the draft forms.

Following the Interview, the DRTs are re-drafted into their final form.

A DRT is an identification and codification of the important judgments and decisions that are
involved in performing a particular task. In addition, the table captures the dynamic flow of
decision-making.

In the analysis, one DRT is completed for each task or worker goal. The DRT specifies:

•   The action sequence involved in the task,
•   The equipment, tools, forms, etc. that are used to conduct the task,
•   A specification of the information the person needs in order to conduct the task,
•   Notes about what is good and useful about the support,
•   Notes about ways in which the support makes the task unnecessarily difficult or awkward, or
    that might be improved.

As a consequence of these depictions, the DRT is intended to suggest new approaches to display
design, workspace design, and work patterns design.
                                                                                            62


4.6.2. Template

                              "Decision Requirements Analysis"

Interviewer                                      Decision Designation or Identifying goal

Participant

Date

Start time

Finish time


What is the decision? What are the goals, purposes, or functions? Why does this decision have
to be made?

How is the decision made? What information is needed?


What are the informational cues?


In what ways can the decision be difficult?


How do you assess the situation or broader context for this decision?


How much time or effort is involved in making this decision?


What is the technology or aid, and how does it help?


Are any work-arounds?


Are there any local "kludges" to compensate for workplace or technology deficiencies?


What kinds of errors can be made?


What kinds of additional aids might be useful?
                                                                                63


When this decision has to be made, are there any hypotheticals or "what ifs?"


What are your options when making this decision?
                                                                                            64


4.7. Action Requirements Analysis


4.7.1. Protocol Notes

This procedure is an interview for workpatterns analysis, and is conducted using Template
Action Requirements Tables (ART) to provide interview structure.

For each ART, the Participant is asked to confirm/flesh out the action sequence, confirm/flesh
out the specification of support and tools, confirm/flesh out the notes on information needs,
confirm/flesh out the notes on usability and usefulness, and to confirm/flesh out the notes on
deficiencies.

The Interviewer makes notes right on the Template forms.

Following the Interview, the ARTs are re-drafted into their final form.

An ART is an identification and codification of the important activities that are involved in
performing a particular task. In addition, the table captures the dynamic flow of activity

In the analysis, one ART is completed for each task or worker goal. The ART specifies:

•   The action sequence involved in the task,
•   The equipment, tools, forms, etc. that are used to conduct the task,
•   A specification of the information the person needs in order to conduct the task,
•   Notes about what is good and useful about the support,
•   Notes about ways in which the support makes the task unnecessarily difficult or awkward, or
    that might be improved.

As a consequence of these depictions, the ART is intended to suggest new approaches to display
design, workspace design, and work patterns design.
                                                                                              65


4.7.2. Template

                                "Action Requirements Analysis"

Interviewer                                        Task Designation or Identifying goal

Participant

Date

Start time

Finish time


What is the action sequence?


What cognitive activities are involved in this task/activity?


In what ways can the activity be difficult? What about the support or information depiction
makes the action sequence difficult?


What are the informational cues? How are they depicted?

What is the technology or aid, and how does it help? What is good or useful about it?


Are any work-arounds?


Are there any local "kludges" to compensate for workplace or technology deficiencies?


What kinds of errors can be made?


What kinds of additional aids might be useful?




4.8. SOP Analysis
                                                                                                    66




4.8.1. Protocol Notes

It is not unheard of for "Standard Operating Procedures" (SOP) documents to be a poor
reflection of actual practice, for a variety of reasons. Workers may rely on short-cuts and work-
arounds that they have discovered or created. SOPs may specify (sub)procedures that are not
regarded as necessary. SOPs may simply be ignored, and the reasons for this might be
informative. An SOP might be outdated (given that task requirements evolve) or ill-specified.

For these and other reasons, the analysis of SOP documents can be a window to the "true work."

The analysis of SOP documents depends on the cooperation of a highly-experienced domain
practitioner who is willing to talk openly and candidly.

For each SOP, the Participant is asked the following questions:
   1. Can you briefly describe that this procedure is really about? What are its goals and
       purposes; what is the basic action sequence?
   2. Who does this procedure?
   3. How often is the procedure conducted?
   4. What is good or easy about the action sequence?
   5. When you conduct the sequence, do you really do it in a way that departs from the
       specifications in the SOP? Are there short-cuts? Do they use a "cheater sheet?"
   6. How often have you actually referred to the SOP document for guidance?

When probing concerning the deficiencies of a tool or workstation, the practitioner's initial
response to the probe may be meditative silence. Only with some patience and re-probing will
deficiencies be mentioned. Often, the practitioner will have discovered deficiencies but will not
have explicitly thought about them. Re-probing can focus on make-work, work-arounds, action
sequence alternatives, alternative displays, changes to the tool, etc. It is critical to ask about each
piece of equipment and technology—whether it is legacy, how it is used, what is good about it,
whether its use is mandated, etc.

In many projects that use Cognitive Work Analysis methodologies, one of the first steps is
bootstrapping, in which the analysts familiarize themselves with the domain. Ordinarily, SOP
documents would be a prime source of information for bootstrapping. However, if one wants to
use the SOP Interview and analysis as a way of verifying the DRT analysis, one may hold off on
even looking at SOP documents during the bootstrapping phase.

In the weather forecasting project (Hoffman, Coffeyand Ford, 2000), it took about 5 minutes to
flesh out the answers for each SOP.

From the Interviewer's notes, formal SOP tables can be created. An example appears below in
Table 4.2.
                                                                                              67

Table 4.2. An example completed SOP Table, for Terminal Air Forecast Verification

Number and Name                 2110 TAF Verification
Description                     Takes about 2 minutes. You input your own TAF and verify the
                                previous one.
Who does this procedure?        Forecaster
How often?                      Every 6 hours (four times per day) unless the field is closed.
Frequency of reference to the   P has referred to this SOP a couple of times. Once you've done
SOP                             it a few times, you know it.
Comments                        Is done on time about 80 percent of the time. Sometimes you
                                get busy, you get tired. You forget to check the home page and
                                when you do you see that GOES isn't downloading or something
                                and so you get involved in fixing that, etc.
                                The OPs Assistant looks at the TAF Verifications to prepare the
                                skill scores.


Invariably, there will be some missing information in the SOP tables that are created after a
single interview. Therefore, SOP Interviews generally have to be conducted in two waves, one
to draft the SOP tables and the second to flesh them out and fine-tune them.

Another common circumstance is when the domain includes workers with special areas of
proficiency or responsibility. Groups of tasks (and the corresponding SOPs) may be largely
unknown to any one individual. In such cases, SOP Interviews will need to be conducted with
more than one individual.
                                                                                              68


4.8.2. Template

                  Analysis of "Standard Operating Procedures" Documents

Interviewer

Participant

Date

Start time

Finish time


SOP Number and Name


What are its goals and purposes; what is the basic action sequence?


Can you briefly describe that this procedure is really about?


What are the purposes and goals of the procedure?


Who conducts this procedure?


How often?


What are the circumstances that trigger the procedure?


Is the procedure optional, or mandatory, and why?


Frequency of reference to the SOP. How often have you actually referred to the SOP document
for guidance?


What information is needed to conduct the task?



What knowledge does a person have to possess in order to be able to conduct this procedure?
                                                                                          69




Can the procedure be conducted easily or well by individuals who have not practiced it?


What is easy about the procedure?


What is difficult about the procedure?


When you conduct the sequence, do you really do it in a way that departs from the
specifications in the SOP? Are there short-cuts? Do you use a "cheater sheet?"


Comments
                                                                                                   70


                               5. Modeling Practitioner Reasoning


5.1. Protocol Analysis


5.1.1. General Introduction

In this document we have been using the word "protocol" to refer to descriptions of procedures
and guidance to the researcher for the conduct of procedures. For the suite of methods that is
referred to as "Protocol Analysis," we have a different use and intended meaning of "protocol."
In this context, a protocol is a record of a process in which a domain practitioner has performed
some sort of task. The record might include data concerning actions and action sequences,
cognitions, and sometimes, also often includes data concerning communication and
collaboration. This protocol must somehow be analyzed or "mined" for data that can be used in
building or verifying a cognitive model (e.g., of reasoning, heuristics, strategies, cognitive styles,
knowledge, etc.) or testing hypotheses about cognition. Exploration of the protocol for such
information is protocol analysis.

"Protocol Analysis" if often referred to as a research method, when in fact it is a data analysis
method. The reason is that protocol analysis is usually employed in conjunction with a single
knowledge elicitation task, the "Think-Aloud Problem Solving" (TAPS) task (see Hoffman,
Militello, and Eccles, 2005). In the TAPS task, the participant is presented with some sort of
puzzle or problem case and is asked to work on the problem while thinking out loud. In their
verbalization the participant is asked to attempt to explicate the problem. An audio recording is
made of the deliberations. That recording is transcribed and the transcription is then analyzed for
content. It is this last activity that is protocol analysis. Thus, many references to Protocol
Analysis as a task or as a CTA method are in fact references to TAPS +PA, that is, TAPS plus
Protocol Analysis as the data analysis method.

In this section of the document we some guidance concerning protocol analysis.


5.1.2. Materials

To conduct a study in which expert's performance at their familiar tasks is examined, one must
select particular problems or cases to present to the expert. Materials can come from a number
of sources.
• Since experts often reason in terms of their memories of past experiences or cases (their "war
    stories") (Kolodner, 1991; Slade, 1991; Wood and Ford, 1993), experts can be asked to
    retrospect about cases that they themselves encountered in the past.
• Hypothetical test cases (e.g., Kidd and Cooper, 1985, Prerau, 1989) can be generated from
    archives data or can be generated by other experts. A set of test cases can be intended to
    sample the domain, or it can be intended to focus on prototypical cases, sometimes to sample
    along a range of difficulty. For example, Senjen (1988) used archived data to generate test
    cases of plans for sampling the insects in orchards. The test cases were presented to expert
    entomologists, who then conducted their familiar task--the generation of advice about the
    design of sampling plans.
                                                                                                71


•   Occasionally, experts come across a particularly difficult or challenging case. Reliance on
    tough cases for TAPS knowledge elicitation can be more revealing than observing experts
    solving common or routine problems (Klein and Hoffman, 1993). Mullin (1989) emphasized
    the need to select so-called well structured test case problems to reveal ordinary "top-down"
    reasoning, and using so-called ill structured or novel test case problems in order to reveal
    flexible or "bottom-up" reasoning. Hoffman (1987) tape recorded the deliberations of two
    expert aerial photo interpreters who had encountered a difficult case of radar image
    interpretation. The case evoked deliberate, pensive problem solving and quite a bit of
    "detective work." In this way, the transcripts were informative of the experts' refined or
    specialized reasoning.


5.1.3. Coding Schemes

In the traditional analysis, each and every statement in the protocol is coded according to some
sort of a priori scheme that reflects the goal of the research (i.e., the creation of models of
reasoning). Hence, the coding categories include, for example, expressions of goals,
observations, and hypotheses.

A number of alternative coding schemes for protocol analysis have been discussed in the
literature. (See for instance, Cross, Christians, and Dorst, 1996; Newell, 1997; Pressley and
Afflerbach, 1995; Simon, 1979). Without exception, the coding scheme the researcher uses is a
function of the task domain and the purposes of the analysis. If the study involves the reasoning
involved in the control of an industrial process, categories would include, for instance,
statements about processes (e.g., catalysis), statements about quantitative relations among
process variables, and so on (see Weilinga and Breuker, 1985). If the study is about puzzle-
solving (e.g., cryptarithmetic), categories might include, for example, statements about goals,
about the states of operators, about elementary functions, and so on. In the study concerns expert
decision making, categories might include: noticing informational cues or patterns, hypothesis
formation, hypothesis testing, seeking information in service of hypothesis testing, sensemaking,
reference to knowledge, procedural rules, inference, metacognition, and so on.

Statements need not just be categorized with reference to a list of coding categories. the scheme
might be more complex and might involve sub-categories, for instance, statements about
operators might be broken down into statements about assigning values to variables, generating
values of a variable, testing an equation for variable y value x, and so on to a fine level of
analysis (see Newell, 1997).

Also, working backwards from a detailed assignment of each and every statement in a protocol,
one can cluster sequences of statements into functional categories (e.g., a sequence of utterances
that all involved a forward search or a means-end analysis, etc. (see Hayes, 1989).


5.1.4. Effort

In addition to these method-shaping questions is an important methodological consideration for
protocol analysis: No matter what task is used to generate the protocol, transcription and analysis
is very time and labor-intensive (see Burton, et al., 1987, 1988; Hoffman, 1987). It takes on the
order of seven to ten hours for even an experienced transcriber to transcribe each hour of audio
                                                                                              72


taped TAPS, largely because even the best typist will have to pause and rewind very frequently,
and cope with many transcription snags (e.g., how do I transcribe hesitations, "um's, "ah's,"
etc.?). Coding takes a considerable amount of time, and the validity check (multiple coders,
comparison of the codings, resolution of disagreements, etc.) takes even more time.

Both Burton, et al. and Hoffman compared TAPS+PA with other methods of eliciting
practitioner knowledge (interviews, sorting tasks, etc.), and both found that TAPS+PA is indeed
time consuming and effortful, and yields less information about domain concepts than did
contrived techniques. The upshot is that in terms of its total yield of information, TAPS with
Protocol Analysis is one of the least efficient method of eliciting domain knowledge from
practitioners. On the other hand, if the analysis focuses just on identifying leverage points or
culling information about practitioner reasoning, and not on the coding of each and every
statement in the protocol, then a review of a protocol can be useful.


5.1.5. Coding Schemes Examples

To illustrate protocol analysis coding schemes, we present four examples. The first three all
come from the weather forecasting case study (Hoffman, Coffey, and Ford, 2000).

Example 1: Abstraction-Decomposition

The first coding scheme we use to illustrate protocol analysis shows how protocol analysis is
shaped by project goals. The Abstraction-Decomposition Analysis scheme evolved out of
research on nuclear safety conducted by engineer Jens Rasmussen at the RISÆ National
Laboratory in Denmark (Rasmussen, Pjtersen, and Schmidt, 1990). That research was initially
focused on engineering solutions to the avoidance of accidents, but the researchers discovered
that human error remained a major problem. Hence, their investigation spilled over into the
ergonomic domain and also the analysis of the broader organizational context. So what started
as an engineering project expanded into a fuller Work Analysis. The researchers developed a
scheme that can be used for coding interviews and TAPS sessions. The coding representation
shows in a single stroke both the category of each proposition and how each proposition fits into
the participant's strategic reasoning process and goal-orientation. This scheme is illustrated in
Figure 6.1. The rows refer to the levels of abstraction for analyzing the aspect of the work
domain that is under investigation. The columns refer to the decomposition of the important
functional components.
                                                                                                            73



         Levels of
         Abstraction                     Levels of

            ê                              Decomposition     è
                                                 Whole             Subsystem        Component
                                                System
         Goals

         Measures of the goals

         General functions and
         activities

         Specific functions and
         activities

         Workspace configuration


                Figure 5.1. The coding scheme of Abstraction-Decomposition Analysis.


Table 5.1. shows how this scheme would apply to the domain of weather forecasting. In
particular, it refers to a workstation system for the Forecast Duty Officer, called the Satellite,
Alphanumerics, NEXRAD and Difax Display System (SAND).


Table 5.1. An instantiation of the Abstraction-Decomposition Analysis.

                     Forecasting Facility       Forecast Duty Officer's             FDO - SAND
                                                          Desk                       Workstation
Goals                Understand the             Forecast the weather        Supports access and analysis
                     weather, Carry out                                     of weather data products from
                     standing orders.                                       various sources.

Measures of the      Duty section forecast      24-hour manning by a        Forecast verification, System
goals                verification statistics.   senior expert               downtime, Ease of use.
General functions    Prepare forecast           Understanding and           Supports access to satellite
and activities       products and services      analysis of weather data.   images, computer models, etc.
                     to clients.
Specific functions   Carry out all              Prepare Terminal Area       Supports comparison of
and activities       Standard Operating         forecasts,                  imagery to lightning network
                     Procedures.                request NEXRAD              data to locate severe storms.
                                                products, etc.
Physical form        The Operations floor       Workspace layout.           CRT location and size,
                     layout.                                                keyboard configuration, desk
                                                                            space, etc.
                                                                                                74


Once a template for use in a work domain has been diagrammed in such a manner, each of the
statements in a specific interview or problem solving protocol can be assigned to the appropriate
cell, resulting in a process tracing that codes the protocol in terms of the work domain. A
hypothetical example appears in Figure 5.2. The numbered path depicts the sequence of
utterances in an interview in which a forecaster was asked to describe the Standard Operating
Procedure involved in the use of the SAND system, supported by probe questions about what
makes the system useful and what makes it difficult.




           Figure 5.2. Protocol tracing using the Abstraction-Decomposition Analysis.
                (Reprinted from Hoffman and Lintern, 2005, with permission.)


Example 2: Coding of Propositions for a Model of Knowledge

In the analysis of an interview transcript, statements were highlighted that could be incorporated
in Concept-Maps of domain knowledge. From the transcript:
                                                                                                75


              'Cause usually in summer here we're far enough south that
              ah...high pressure will dominate, and you'll keep the fronts and
              that cold polar continental air north of us. Even if the front works
              its way down, usually by the time it gets here it’s a dry front and
              doesn't have a lot of impact... I also think of ah... I think of
              tornados too. Severe thunderstorms and tornadoes are all part of
              the summer regime. And again, tornadoes and severe
              thunderstorms here are not quite as severe as they are inland like
              we talked about last time, because they need to get far enough in
              to get the mixing, the shearing and the lift. And that takes a while
              to develop and unfold. You really don't see that kind of play until
              this maritime air starts to cross the land-sea interface.

Starting at the beginning of this excerpt, one sees the following propositions:
        (In the Gulf Coast region) high pressure will dominate (in the summer)
        (High pressure) keeps fronts north of us (the Gulf Coast region)
        (High pressure) keeps cold polar continental air north of us (the Gulf Coast region).

       Example 3: Coding for Leverage Points

In an analysis of SOP documents, the Participant went through each of the Standard Operating
Procedures and was probed about each one, as illustrated in Table 5.2. The purpose of the coding
was to identify leverage points, indicated by the boldings.
                                                                                                        76

Table 5.2. Notes from an interview concerning a SOP. SIGMET stands for SIGnificant
METeorologcical event.

Task/Job: Observer updates SIGMETs

Action sequence: Conducted every hour (valid for 2 hours)
SIGMET is defined and identified
Change is saved as a jpeg file
Change is sent to the METOC home page and to thereby to the Wall of Thunder

What supports the action sequence?         What is the needed information?

METOC PC                                   How to find the SIGMETS (they come from Kansas City).
Powerpoint with an old kludge. There       Have to plot them - sometimes look up stations in the
are a series of 4 maps                     station identifier book. Have to know more geography
- SE Texas - East Coast,                   than many observers know.
- FL, AL, MS,
- VA through GA,
- TX, OK, Arkansas.
What is good or useful about the support and the depiction of needed information?

The SIGMETS themselves are really good - give customers good information at a glance.
The PowerPoint maps are designed for METOC - they have all geographical information and 3 letter
identifiers (e.g., PNS for Pensacola) that is needed. Other forecasting offices have blank maps of the US.

What about the support or information depiction makes the action sequence difficult?

Too labor intensive - the whole system is archaic. There is a commercial Web site that has a Java
program with map and red box for SIGMET. you can highlight the box and get text describing the
SIGMET. This always seems to be updated.
Limited capability to customize the shapes of the SIGMET areas.
The map cannot move as you are in the act of drawing a SIGMET--you have to change functions
and scroll the map with the mouse.
The alphanumerics are hard to see even if you zoom.
The map shown on the CRT is not large enough, details are hard to read.
It is a sectored map--cuts off at Texas.
You sometimes have to hunt for station identifiers--end up searching via "Yahoo." Some stations
have several IDs.
Map cannot scroll outside a limited area.
Nothing in the work environment reminds the Observer to conduct the task.
NOTE: The final display of SIGMETs does not support a zoom function. They aren't easy to see on
Data Wall.
The work is often done on the hardcopy map lying on the table--where you can see all the regions and
station identifiers in a glance, and read all the details. After figuring it out on the hardcopy map the
Observer inputs it into the computer.



The entries in this table are the researcher's notes from the interview—including some
paraphrases and synopses of what the participant said—and are not an utterance-for utterance
protocol. This underscores the idea that protocol analysis, as a data analysis method, can be
divorced from the TAPS task and can be used for a variety of purposes.
                                                                                               77



Example 4: Coding an Unstructured Interview to Identify Rules for an Expert System.

A project for the U. S. Air Force Military Airlift Command was aimed at developing an expert
system to assist in the creation of airlift plans (Hoffman, 1986). The software used in planning
was complex, and only one individual had achieved expertise in its use. The researchers
conducted an unstructured interview with that expert. An example excerpt is presented in the
left-hand column in Table 5.3. The focus of the interview at this point was on the kinds and
nature of the information provided in a file about airfields. The excerpt is cropped in the center
column, with boldings in that column indicating the coded pieces. The right-hand column shows
the encoded propositions in an intermediate representation, a step closer to implementability as
concepts for a knowledge base and procedural rules for an inference engine.
                                                                                                               78

    Table 5.3. Coding of a transcript from an unstructured interview. The purpose was to identify
    concepts for a knowledge base and potential inference rules for an inference engine.

                Transcript                                Encoded                         Concepts
                                                         Transcript                         and
                                                                                           Rules

I: What is the difference between MOG
and airport capability?

E: Ah… MOG maximum on the ground               E: Ah… MOG maximum on             Concept:
is parking spots… on the ramp. Airport         the ground is parking spots…      Maximum number of
capability is how many passengers and          on the ramp. Airport              aircraft allowed on the
tons of cargo per day it can handle at the     capability is how many            ground = MOG
facilities.                                    passengers and tons of cargo
                                               per day it can handle at the      Concept:
I: Throughput… ah… throughput as a             facilities.                       Airport capability is the
function of…                                                                     number of passengers and
E: It all sorta goes together as throughput.                                     number of tons of cargo
If you've only got… if you can only have                                         per day the airport can
ah… if you've got only one parking ramp                                          throughput.
with the ability to handle 10,000 tons a
day, then your… your throughput is
gonna be limited by your parking ramp.
Of the problem could be vice versa.            … your throughput is gonna        Rule:
                                               be limited by your parking        Parking ramp capacity can
I: Yeah?…                                      ramp. Of the problem could be     limit throughput.)
                                               vice versa.
E: So it's a [unintelligible phrase in the
audio recording]

I: So what if you had only one loader, so
that you could only unload one wide-
body airplane at a time? You wouldn't
want to schedule five planes in the
ground simultaneously. How would you
restrict that?

E: We know we're not gonna get all the         E: We know we're not gonna get
error out of it. We're gonna try and           all the error out of it. We're
minimize the error. And then we'll say         gonna try and minimize the
that… ah… we'll say an arrival-departure       error. And then we'll say that…
interval of one hour, so that means that       ah… we'll say an arrival-         Rule:
the probability of having two wide-bodies      departure interval of one         If you need to restrict the
on the ground tryin' to get support from       hour, so that means that the      number of aircraft on the
the loader is cut…                             probability of having two         ground then manipulate
                                               wide-bodies on the ground         the arrival-departure
                                               tryin' to get support from the    interval.
                                               loader is cut…

    Note in this example that there are many propositions in the Expert's statements (e.g., "The
    airport designation file only includes the field's common name, latitude, longitude, MOG, and
    capability) that were not coded because they were not useful in composing implementable
                                                                                              79


statements. In addition there were statements made by the Interviewer (e.g., "The airport
capability can be restricted by the number of loaders.") and that also could have been coded, and
even implemented as rules, but were not because they were only tacitly affirmed by the Expert.
(This sort of slippage is one of the disadvantages to unstructured interviews).

Like the first three examples, this fourth one also makes the point that the coding scheme
depends heavily on the purposes of the analysis.


5.1.6. Coding Verification

In some cases it is valuable to have more than one coder conduct the protocol coding task. In
some cases it is necessary for demonstrating soundness of the research method and the
conclusions drawn from the research. For research in which data from the TAPS task are used to
make strong claims about reasoning processes, especially reasoning models that assert cause-
effect relations among mental operations, the assessment of inter-coder reliability of protocol
codings is regarded as a critical aspect of the research (see Ericsson and Simon, 1993).

There are a number of ways of using multiple coders and conducting a validity check. In the
simplest procedure, two researchers independently code the statements in the protocol and a
percentage of agreement is calculated. Researchers typically look to find a high rate of 85
percent or greater agreement among multiple coders (see Hoffman, Crandall, and Shadbolt,
1998).

Analysis of multiple codings can show that the coding scheme is well defined, consistent, and
coherent. On the other hand, it is likely that there will be disagreements, even among coders who
are practiced and are familiar with the task domain. Disagreements can be useful pointers to
ways in which the coding scheme, and the functional categories on which it is based, might be in
need of refinement.


5.1.7. Procedural Variations and Short-cuts.

In another procedure:

   1. Two or more researchers, working independently, go over the typed transcript and
      highlight every statement that can be taken as an instance of one of the coding categories.
   2. Each researcher codes each highlighted statement in terms of the coding categories.
   3. Each researcher codes the highlighted statements from OTHER researcher's
      highlightings.
   4. Both the highlightings and the codings from the researchers are compared.

A short-cut on this general approach to coding verification is to have multiple coders and a
reliability check, and once an agreement rate of 85% or more is achieved, all remaining
transcripts can be coded by individual researchers.

Because the process of transcription alone, let alone coding in addition, is very time-consuming
and effortful, researchers may want to consider another short-cut. In this procedural variation,
there are two researchers, one serving as Interviewer to facilitate the interview (or other
                                                                                                80


empirical procedure) and the other serving as a Recorder. about what everyone says, especially
things that he participant says that are salient in terms of the project goals. After the notes are
transcribed, each researcher independently highlights every statement that can be taken as a
reference to a coding category.

For some research, the assessment (elaborate or otherwise) of inter-coder reliability may not be
necessary. For instance, the identification of leverage points in the analysis of the Standard
Operating Procedures in the weather forecasting case study (Hoffman, Coffey, and Ford, 2000)
did not require an assessment of inter-coder reliability because the leverage points were
explicitly elicited from the expert using interview probe questions. Furthermore, the coding
scheme was simple—a statement either was or was not an expression of a possible leverage
point. Likewise, in the protocol analysis of the Concept Mapping interview, the identification of
statements that could be used in Concept Maps did not mandate verification that all possible
statements that could be used in Concept Maps were in fact identified and used. Such an analysis
would have actually detracted from the main the goal of the analysis, which was to identify
propositions that could be used in Concept-Maps on particular topics, and that were not already
in the Concept-Maps that had been created.


5.1.8. A Final Word

In planning to conduct a protocol analysis procedure in the context of systems design, there are a
number of questions the researcher might consider at the outset. These are presented in Table
5.4.
                                                                                                 81

Table 5.4. Some questions for consideration when planning for a protocol analysis procedure.

What are the purposes?
  • If the purpose is to develop reasoning models, then the categorization scheme needs to
     include such (slippery) categories as "observation," "goal," and "hypothesis."
  • If the purpose is to identify leverage points, the categorization scheme can be simple (i.e.,
     highlighting statements that refer any sort of obstacle to problem solving).
  •
What is the level of analysis?
 • Do I cut a coarse grain—"notice," "choose," "act"?
 • Or do I cut a fine grain based on a functional analysis of the particular domain? (e.g., "look at
     data type x," "notice pattern q," "choose operation y," "perform procedure z," and so on).
 •
Do I need to code each and every statement?
  • What constitutes a statement? Do I separate them by the hesitations on the recording?
  • How do I cope with synonyms, anaphor, etc.?
  • Statements are often obviously dependent on previous statements. Context dependence is
      always a feature of protocol analysis because context dependence is always a feature of
      discourse.
  •
How intensive must the validity check be?
 • Indeed, must there be a validity check at all given the purposes of the research?
 • Do I need to have independent coders code the protocol, and then compare the
     codings for inter-coder reliability? How many coders—two? Three? What rate of
     agreement is acceptable? How do I cope with the inevitable disagreements?


Answers to these questions will determine what, precisely, is done during the protocol analysis.
                                                                                                82




5.2. The Cognitive Modeling Procedure

5.2.1. Introduction and Background

The Documentation Analysis, Work Space Analysis, Participant Interviews, and other
bootstrapping methods can allow the researcher to forge a preliminary model of domain
practitioner reasoning or reasoning style, and even variations that capture the reasoning of less
versus more proficient Practitioners, or variations representing the ways that reasoning strategies
are shaped by problem types.

As is traditional in cognitive science, such models take the form of information processing flow
diagrams or decision trees, with boxes indicating mental capacities such as memory, boxes
indicating mental operations such as inference, and arrows indicating transformations or
information flows among the hypothetical components.

The question always arises as to how to validate such models, that is, insure that the models are
veridical or valid. The main approach taken in traditional experimental psychology is to conduct
programmes of experimental research in which models are developed, refined, and then tested
under controlled circumstances that allow convergence on the "truth" concerning the causal
relations among mental processes.

For the purposes of most applied research--which is invariably conducted under significant
constraints of time, resources, and particular goals--it is out of the question to step out of the
Cognitive Work Analysis and Cognitive Field Research venue to design and conduct series of
formal experiments. Might there not be some other way to take a "fast track into the black box?"

One way would be to simply present to the domain Practitioners the model that the researcher
forged in the bootstrapping process, and elicit their commentary, i.e., "Does this model capture
your reasoning?" There are two main difficulties with this approach:

•   Knowledge elicitation using abstract or conceptual-level probes can be ineffective. Research
    using the CDM procedure, for example, has shown repeatedly that the more effective probes
    are those that are couched in terms of specific experiences (e.g., "How did you reason in this
    particular case?") rather than in terms of typical patterns (i.e., "Describe how your typical
    pattern of reasoning.).

•   Any responses to the Base Model may be "just-so stories," biased by the Base Model itself.
    That is, the responses may reflect the Practitioner's attempt to please the interviewer.

A second way to obtain validation would be via observations, to see if the patterns of behavior
suggested by the model conform to actual task behavior. The main difficulty here is that
cognitive activities (i.e., data inspection in service of mental model formation versus data
inspection in service of hypothesis testing) may not be discernable on the basis of overt
behaviors.
                                                                                          83


The issue of validating cognitive models is a significant one, and in theory requires formal
controlled, and costly experimentation.


5.2.2 Protocol Notes

The "Cognitive Modeling Procedure" (CMP) is one way of obtaining validation in direct, and
more efficient manner. In this interview, one begins with the "Base Model of Expertise." (See
Hoffman and Shadbolt, 1996). The Base Model is shown in the following Figure.
                                                                                               84


5.2.2.1. Preparation

Armed with this Base Model, the researcher takes what was learned from the bootstrapping
activities (i.e., documentation analysis, unstructured interviews, etc.) and tweaks the Base Model
to make it accord with the domain. In the case of the weather forecasting domain, the Base
Model would be modified as in the following Figure.
                                                                                               85


Next, the researcher takes the elements in the Base Model and recombines them so as to create
two "bogus models." The bogus models will include boxes containing concept terms and action
paths (arrows) labeled by actions. The following Table lists the sorts of terms and labels that
reasoning models can include. This listing of terms was compiled from the models presented in a
great number of recent studies of various domains of real-world decision-making (Hoffman and
Shadbolt, 1995).

    Some Useful Concept-terms                    Some Useful Labels for Action
                                                            Paths
UNDERSTANDING OF THE CURRENT                  COMPARE
SITUATION
MENTAL SIMULATION                             AGREE?
KNOWLEDGE OF CONCEPTS                         DISAGREE?
KNOWLEDGE OF PRINCIPLES                       TEST HYPOTHESIS
KNOWLEDGE OF "RULES OF THUMB"                 REVISE/CHANGE
MEMORY/PAST EXPERIENCES                       SEARCH
PATTERN                                       RECOGNIZE
CUE                                           VERIFY/CONFIRM
PREDICTION                                    REFUTE
HYPOTHESIS                                    RECOGNIZE PROBLEM
GUIDANCE                                      MODIFY
PLAN                                          IMPLEMENT
INPUT/OBSERVATIONS                            REMEMBER
JUDGMENT                                      EVALUATE
GOAL/SUB-GOAL                                 DIAGNOSE
EXPECTATION                                   INFER
PROTOTYPE/SCHEMA                              DETECT
                                              IDENTIFY
                                              ASSESS
                                                CONFIDENCE
                                                QUALITY
                                                ALTERNATIVES/COURSES OF
                                                    ACTION
                                              ANALOGIZE
                                              RECOMMEND
                                              DECIDE/CHOOSE/SELECT
                                              PRIORITIZE
                                              SCHEDULE

The concept-terms used for boxes and for action paths are not limited, except in that as they need
to make reference to cognitive activities and task-relevant behaviors, and in that they have to
make functional sense in terms of the data that have already been collected up to the point when
the Cognitive Modeling Procedure is conducted.

To the greatest extent possible, the concept terms and action path labels should not rely on
technical or psychological jargon. (See the Table above.) For instance, if one were to use the
concept "mental model," the concept would have to be explained to the Participant. Instead, one
might use lay terminology such as "Understanding of the Current Situation."
                                                                                                86


The two bogus models need to be reasonable. For example, one would probably not have a
"disagree" link lead directly to a box labeled "output judgment."

One or both of the bogus models should include some sort of feedback loop, to let the participant
know that such loops are acceptable. This is especially important since it is a good bet that one
or more such loops will be involved in proficient reasoning in any domain. If one were to
present two artificial models that did not contain one or more feedback loops, this might give the
Participant the impression that the Interviewer was expecting purely linear models.

On the other hand, one should avoid having the feedback loop in the bogus models be an actual
Duncker refinement cycle. One of the main things one seeks in the Cognitive Modeling
Procedure is to have the Participant re-create this cycle and thereby validate the Base Model.

One or both of the bogus models should include some notion that hearkens of hypothesis testing,
and some notion that hearkens of situational awareness, again since it is a good bet that such
notions will be involved in proficient reasoning in any domain

On the other hand, the two bogus models should not conform precisely to those models that
actually do, at this stage of inquiry, seem to describe Practitioner reasoning.

Try to make the two bogus models fairly simple (see the Base Model that is presented here). The
artificial models should have only about 5 boxes and 3 linking arrows. the bogus models should
serve as an invitation for the Practitioner to adapt the terms to their domain and flesh the models
out.

Example "bogus models" are presented below in the Boiler Plate sub-section, and these can be
used in composing the CMP.


5.2.2.2. Round 1

In Round 1 of the CMP, the Practitioner/Participant is presented with the two bogus models and
is asked two probe questions:

       •   Which of these seems to best describe how you approach your domain task(s)?

       •   Are there any ways in which this (selected) model seems to be incorrect or in need of
           refinement?

(Don't be surprised if the participant shrugs, or even chuckles.) The Participant is told that they
can feel free to concoct a diagram of their own, and that there is no one correct way of
diagramming their reasoning of strategies. Indeed, they should be told that they may need more
than one diagram to capture their different strategies or the ways in which their reasoning might
depend on the nature of the case or situation at hand.

It is recommended that the participant be explicitly informed that they are allowed some quiet
time alone, and perhaps even a span of a few days, to ponder the models and consider their
answers to the probe questions. Otherwise, the pressure of having to create a more immediate
answer might have a negative impact on the reflective thought that this task requires.
                                                                                                 87



The caution here being that if the researcher leaves material with the Practitioner, there is a high
likelihood that on the researcher's return, nothing will have been done. Domain Practitioners,
even those who may be enthused about the project, will often, if not usually "drop the ball" if left
to their own devices. It is highly recommended that if the material is to be left with the
Practitioner, at the time when the material is first presented an appointment should be made for a
specific date and time no more than a week hence when the interview and discussion will be
conducted.

The notion in this interview is to have the domain Practitioner correct the bogus model that was
selected as being the one that came closest to matching their own reasoning. model. The
Practitioner is expected to and add richness to the over-simplification of the bogus model. What
should come out as a consequence should be in greater conformity with the Base Model, i.e.,
validation of the Base Model or a Base Model of a particular reasoning style.

Although this interview method engages the Practitioner at an abstract or conceptual level of
analyzing their own thinking, it does not seem to suffer from the abstractness. When a model
does not fit, the Practitioner can see this, and can use the bogus models as support in clarifying
their description of their own reasoning style.

After the completion of Round 1, the Researcher prepares a polished version of the Participant's
model. Inevitably, the polished models will differ from the models crafted by the participants in
Round 1, in ways that can be subtle and possibly profound. This is because of the degrees of
freedom one has in concocting these sorts of models, and also because of the deliberate attempt
on the part of the researcher to "clean up" the Participant's descriptions and create an elegant, if
not totally logical, depiction. There are many degrees of freedom involved in the construction of
reasoning models, and there is no single correct way to create a model. Placement of concepts
and identification of paths can vary considerably without fundamentally altering the important
flows in reasoning sequences. Thus, it is prudent to present the polished model to the Participant
and invite comment. Fine-tuning of the model may be called for.


5.2.2.3. Round 2

After the Round 1 data have been collected and the resulting models from a number of domain
Practitioners have been placed into a polished graphic, it is possible to run Round 2. In Round 2,
each Participant Expert is presented with copies of all of the models that had been derived in
Round 1. Added to this set are some foils derived from the analysis of Participants who are not
expert, and some (new) bogus models. The task presented to each Participant Expert is to:

•   Judge which model goes with which of the Practitioners (including their own)
                       or
       Rate the degree of expertise manifested in each of the models
•   Judge which model(s) describe the reasoning of individuals who are not experts
•   Judge which model(s) are bogus, and
•   Rate their degree of confidence in each of their judgments.
                                                                                                88


It is best to limit the number of models to less than 10 (say, one bogus model, two apprentice
models, and 4 expert models). For greater numbers of models, the task can become
overwhelming.

The Interviewer keeps track of task time and takes notes.

Round 2 can be used to explore a number of hypotheses about the work domain. For instance, if
the Practitioner-participants are all experts, one might expect that their models would tend to be
similar, and hence in Round 2 they would show considerable confusion and even fail to
recognize their own model. If this hypothesis is of interest, it is desirable for the researcher to
wait some weeks, or even months, between the conclusion of Round 1 and the beginning of
Round 2.

The researcher may be interested in testing hypotheses about the workplace, such as, "Do these
Practitioners discuss their reasoning amongst themselves?" "Do the all have the opportunity to
learn of each others' reasoning styles and strategies by seeing each other in action?" "How
closely do they communicate and cooperate in their organizational context?" Results from Round
2 can address such questions.
                                                                                                             89


                                        Hypotheses for Round 2

                 HYPOTHESIS                                   ALTERNATIVE HYPOTHESIS


Experts will recognize their own models, with          If there is a time delay between CMP Round 1 and
confidence, if only because they will have already     Round 2, experts will confuse the models and will
seen their polished model during the Round 1           fail to recognize their own. As skill approaches
discussion in which the Analyst's cleaned-up           expertise, one would expect the reasoning models to
version is presented for confirmation.                 converge, setting the stage for error or confusion.

                                                       Experts may falsely recognize models of other
                                                       Experts, insofar as those other models conform to
                                                       some degree to their own reasoning, or to the
                                                       normative model of proficient reasoning.

Experts will recognize the models of individuals       Expert models might be relatively simple as well as
who are not expert, with confidence, especially if     complex, depending on the level of detail the Expert
the non-expert models tend to be simplifications.      went into during CMP Round 1. So, just because a
                                                       model is simple, that does not mean that it is
                                                       necessarily a bogus or an apprentice model. Indeed,
                                                       a participant may regard even a bogus model as
                                                       being an expert's model.

Experts will correctly identify the bogus models,      If the bogus models are oversimplifications rather
assuming that the bogus models include some sort       than clear violations of domain practice, then they
of clear violation of domain practice or logic.        may be confused with the expert models.

Experts are likely to use a "divide-and-conquer"       Other strategies are possible. A less frequent one is
strategy in which they first attempt to identify the   to peruse all of the models carefully before making
models of the senior experts, and their own model,     any decisions.
and then partial out the remaining alternatives into
the apprentice and bogus categories.

Advanced apprentices and journeymen should be          None of the participants will show confidence in
able to say which model goes with each expert,         assigning the models, since they may rarely, if ever,
assuming that they have had the opportunity to         discuss or even have the opportunity to witness, one
work with each of the experts. Presumably, the         another's reasoning style or strategy.
apprentices and journeymen observe the experts'
reasoning patterns and recognize stylistic
differences and individual preferences.
                                                                                               90


5.2.2.4. Round 3

In Round 3, the Analyst observes the Participant when he or she is conducting an actual task in
the operational context. The researcher notes as much as possible about everything the
Practitioner does and says, seeking behavioral evidence that might confirm or disconfirm aspects
of the Participant's model. For instance, if a participant asserts in Round 1 that they always
begin their familiar task by looking at a particular data type, then there should be corresponding
behavior that should be observable-- if the researcher is located in the workplace just at the
moment the participant begins to conduct their familiar task.

In addition to taking detailed notes on the Practitioner's behavior, the researcher can use the
refined participant's model as a "checklist."

It is possible during Round 3 to ask occasional probe questions (assuming that such intrusion in
the operational setting is appropriate, acceptable, and agreed to in advance). For instance,
suppose again that a Practitioner asserted in Round 1 that they begin their familiar task by
inspecting a particular data type (that should be observable in their behavior) and also said in
Round 1 that they then attempt to come to an understanding of the current situation. This is
mental modeling, which in all likelihood will not be readily observable. The researcher might
simply ask, "What are you thinking?" just at the point where the Practitioner has conducted the
initial examination of the data for an appropriate span of time, or has turned away from the data.

Round 3 has to be conducted opportunistically. For instance, in the weather forecasting project it
was decided that the best time to make the Round 3 observations would be at the very beginning
of the watch period of a forecaster who had been off of the watchbill for a span of days. In this
case, the forecaster would almost certainly have to begin their watch by examining data to
develop their initial mental model of the overall weather situation--something most of the
forecasters asserted (in Round 1) that they did. If they were observed on any other day, they
would have already had a mental model of the current weather situation when they walked in the
door. Furthermore, the observations had to be conducted at a time when the local weather was
not in a persistence regime--when the weather is dominated by an air mass or a stationary front,
making the weather situation basically the same from day to day.

Opportunism notwithstanding, the researcher needs to keep focused on the main goal of Round
3--observe whatever can be observed, and even ask probe questions, to see what elements of the
Practitioner's model are mirrored in actual behavior.

The Round 3 results can also be examined with regard to the Base Model of domain expertise
that was developed in the Preparation phase--which elements were affirmed, which need
refinement.


5.2.2.4. Round 3

Following Round 3, the data collected in all three Rounds can be pulled together into the final
products:

•   Refined Base Model of domain expertise
•   Refined models of the reasoning of the individual participants
                                                                          91


•   Conclusions regarding any hypotheses that were testable in Round 2.
                        92


5.2.3. Templates


5.2.3.1. Round 1

Example Bogus Models.
93
                                                                                           94



Analyst
Participant
Date
Start Time
Finish Time

                                     Instructions

Based on the material we have collected so far in this project, we have attempted to
create something like a logical flow diagram that attempts to capture the sorts of
strategies that domain Practitioners use.

On the next page you will see diagrams of two possible reasoning strategies. Another
way of saying what this is that these are two alternative ways of describing what you do
when you conduct your usual or typical task.

We would like you to look at these and think about them. You may have some
immediate reactions, but you may want to take this booklet with you and think about the
strategies for a day or so.

Which of these seems to best describe how you approach your domain task(s)?

Are there any ways in which this (selected) model seems to be incorrect or in need of
refinement?

Please feel free to concoct diagrams of your own. You might use a strategy other than
those shown here. You might use more than one strategy depending on the given task
situation.

Please keep in mind that there is no one correct way of diagramming your reasoning of
strategies. Indeed, you may need more than one diagram to capture your different
strategies, or those of other Practitioners.

After you have thought about the two strategies that are depicted in the diagram, please
complete pages 4 and 5.




Insert your "Bogus Models" page here
                                                                                                 95



Which of these diagrams seems to best describe how you approach your domain task(s)? In
what ways does it seem to capture your strategies?




Are there any ways in which this (selected) diagram seems to be incorrect or in need of
refinement? What changes would you make? Feel free to make changes right on the diagram
page itself.




Feel free to concoct diagrams of your own, ones that better represent your strategy or strategies.




                                         DISCUSSION




5.2.3.2. Round 2
                                                                                            96



Analyst
Participant
Date
Start Time
Finish Time

                                      Instructions

Based on the material we have collected so far we have been able to recreate graphical
representations of the reasoning styles of each of our Participants. Those models appear
on these pages that I will lay out on the table.

For each of these models, we would like to guess "who is the owner." That is, for each
model, can you determine the person whose reasoning the model seems to capture?

Please write you judgment on each page. If you uncertain of the ownership of a model,
you can give more than one guess.

Also, try to give your reasons for assigning models to individuals. What in your
experience working with each individual leads you to assign each particular model to
each particular person?

One of the models is yours. Can you tell which? If so, what clues you in?

Not all of the models presented here go with the Experts. One or more may represent the
reasoning of an individual who is less-than-expert. See if you can determine that.

Not all of the models presented here are "real" models that would represent the reasoning
of ANY domain Practitioner, whether expert or not. See if you can determine which of
the models is "bogus."

In attempting to determine the ownership of a model, you may be confident, or uncertain,
for any of a variety of reasons. For instance, you may have the suspicion that a given
model represents the reasoning of some particular person, but you may not have had
much opportunity to actually witness that person's reasoning style. Hence, you may be
uncertain. As another example, you may feel that more than one model might represent
the reasoning of a particular person.
Please share such reactions with the researcher.

If you have any questions at any time, please ask.



(reproduce the following set of cells, as needed)

MODEL                     Whose Model is it?                       Rate your confidence
  ID
                                                                      97


Check One:                              Circle one:

Name   ______________________________      1   - Highly Confident
A "bogus" model   _______                  2   - Confident
Someone who is                             3   - Somewhat confident
  not an expert   _______
                                           4   - Somewhat uncertain
                                           5   - Uncertain
                                           6   - Very Uncertain


                       COMMENTS
                                                              98


5.2.3.3. Round 3


Analyst
Participant
Date
Start Time
Finish Time

E =EVENT,
P = PROBE          TIME                              NOTES
R = REPLY,
A = ANALYSIS




                          (reproduce this table, as needed)
                                                                                               99


                                  6. Critical Decision Method


6.1. General Description of the CDM Procedure

The CDM Procedure involves multi-pass retrospection. The expert is guided in the recall and
elaboration of a previously-experienced case. The CDM leverages the fact that domain experts
often retain detailed memories of previously-encountered cases, especially ones that were
unusual, challenging, or in one way or another involved "critical decisions." The CDM works by
deliberately avoiding generic questions of the kind, "Tell me everything you know about x," or,
"Can you describe your typical procedure?" Such generic questions have not met with much
success in the experience of many knowledge engineers. More fundamentally:

1. In complex sociotechnological domains of practice, there often is no general or typical
   procedure.
2. Scenarios may be "typical," or prototypical, but:
              There are likely to be many action sequence alternatives, even for routine
                     tasks and routine situations.
              Procedures will vary as a function of style.
              Procedures will vary as a function of the equipment status.
              Procedures will vary as a function of practitioner skill level.

Thus, any uniformities observed in procedures may reflect problem differences only, and are
likely to simply reflect the procedures taught in the schoolhouse and are prescribed by the
operational forms and reporting procedures. Therefore, the CDM probes focus on the recall of
specific, concrete experiences from the forecaster's experience

6.1.0. Preparation

•   Training of elicitors to properly conduct the CDM procedure has involved a number
    of exercises, including experience in the role of interviewee, experience in the
    conduct of (mock) CDM procedures, and experience at preparing an interview guide.
    As in the exercise of any knowledge elicitation method, effective use of the CDM
    presumes that the elicitor is a skillful facilitator at the level of the social dynamic.

•   The knowledge elicitor must become familiar with the domain—through analysis of
    research and technical documents, preliminary interviews (i.e., conversations with
    domain experts, on-site observations, etc.).

•   The goals for knowledge elicitation are specified and defined operationally.

•   Experts, in sufficient number, must be available and cooperative.

6.1.1. Step One: Incident Selection

The opening query poses a particular type of event or situation and asks for an example
where the experts' decision making altered the outcome, where things would have turned
out differently had s/he not been there to intervene, or where the experts' skills were
particularly challenged. The incident must come from the person's own lived experience
                                                                                                100


as a decision maker. The goal in this Step is to help the participant identify cases that are
non-routine, especially challenging, or difficult —cases where one might expect
differences between the decisions and actions of an expert and those of someone with less
experience, and cases where elements of expertise are likely to emerge. One should
bypass incidents that are memorable for tangential reasons (e.g., someone died during the
incident) and incidents that are memorable but did not involve the expert in a key
decision-making role.

6.1.2. Step Two: Incident Recall

The participant is asked to recount the episode in its entirety. The participant is asked to
"walk through" the incident and to describe it from beginning to end. The elicitor asks
few, if any, questions, and allows the participant to structure the account.

6.1.3. Step Three: Incident Retelling

Once the expert has completed the initial recounting of the incident, the elicitor tells the
story back, matching as closely as possible the expert's own phrasing and terminology, as
well as incident content and sequence. The participant is asked to attend to the details
and sequence. The participant will usually offer additional details and clarifications, and
corrections. This sweep allows the elicitor and the participant to arrive at a common
understanding of the incident.

6.1.4. Step Four: Timeline Verification and Decision Point Identification

The expert goes back over an incident account a second time. The expert is asked for the
approximate time of key events. A timeline is composed along a domain-meaningful
temporal scale, based on the elicitor's judgment about the important events, the important
decisions, and the important actions taken. The timeline is shared with and verified by
the expert as it is being constructed. The elicitor's goal is to capture the salient events
within the incident, ordered by time and expressed in terms of the points where important
input information was received or acquired, points where decisions were made, and
points where actions were taken. Input information could include objectively verifiable
events (e.g., "The second fire truck arrived on the scene" ) and subjective observations
(e.g., "I noticed that the color of the smoke had changed; it was a lot darker than it had
been when I arrived on the scene" ). In some cases, the markers for decision points are
obvious in the expert's statements (e.g., "I had to decide whether it was safe to send my
firefighters inside the building" ).      In other cases, the expert's statements suggest
feasible alternative courses of action that were considered and discarded; or suggest that
the expert was making judgments that would affect the course of decision making. The
goal is to specify and verify decision points, points where there existed different possible
ways to understanding a situation or different possible actions.

6.1.5. Step Five: Deepening

The elicitor leads the participant back over the incident account a third time, employing
probe questions that focus attention on particular aspects of each decision-making event
within the incident. The step typically begins with questions about the informational
cues that were involved in the initial assessment of the incident. The elicitor focuses the
                                                                                               101


participant's attention on the array of cues and information available within the situation,
eliciting the meanings those cues hold and the expectations, goals, and actions they
engender.      The elicitor then works through each segment of the story, asking for
additional detail and encouraging the expert to expand on the incident account. This step
is often the most intensive, sometimes taking an hour or more. Solicited information
depends on the purpose of the study, but might include presence or absence of salient
cues and the nature of those cues, assessment of the situation and the basis of that
assessment, expectations about how the situation might evolve, the goals that were
considered, and the options that may have been evaluated. The array of topics and
specific probe questions that might be used in this sweep of the CDM are listed with the
Boiler Plate forms (below). No single CDM procedure would be likely to include all of
the topics or probes presented here; elicitors select some subset of these in accord with
goals of the study.

6.1.6. Step Six: "What if?" Queries

The fourth sweep through the incident involves shifting the from the participant's actual
experience of the event to a more analytical strategy.          The elicitor poses various
hypothetical changes to the incident account and asks the participant to speculate on what
might have happened differently. In studies of expert decision making, for example, the
query might be: "At this point in the incident, what if it had been a novice present, rather
than someone with your level of proficiency? Would they have noticed Y? Would they
have known to do X?" The elicitor can ask the expert to identify potential errors at each
decision point and how and why errors might occur, in order to better understand the
vulnerabilities and critical junctures within the incident. The purpose of the "what if"
probes is to specify pertinent dimensions of variation for key features contained in the
incident account. Klein, Calderwood, and MacGregor (1989) noted that the reasons for
taking a particular action are frequently illuminated through understanding choices that
were not made, or that were rejected.
                                                                                               102


6.2. Protocol Notes For the Researcher


•   The goal is to develop a detailed account of a set of scenarios via the method of
    retrospection concerning "critical" decisions.

•   The detailed account will include timelines and decision-point analyses.

•   A time-line is a layout of the sequence of events involved in the analysis of a
    particular event or scenario.

•   The fundamental dimension is the time course of the event, and laid onto this are
    milestones indicated by component events, situation assessments and decision points-
    actions.

•   Situation assessments are based on informational cues and component events.

•   Decision points involve triggering cues and situation assessments, determination that
    information is needed, hypothetical reasoning, action options, action goals, and action
    rationale.

•   Do not plan to obtain detailed CDM accounts representing all possible tasks,
    scenarios, mission types, etc.

•   Since practitioner skill levels and styles are both highly variable, and are themselves
    dependent on context, the analysis must focus at the functional level. If the analysis
    goes into too detailed a level, the recommendations may not address the most
    significant system design problems.

•   Seek information about cognitive skills and requirements across the many different
    aspects of the work as performed by different types of practitioners, rather than trying
    to specify everything involved in each of a set of various particular types of
    procedures.

•   Do not focus on specifying the details of each and every task/scenario, but instead
    focus on the variability in the tasks that practitioners face and the cognitive demands
    that are shared across tasks/scenarios.
                                                                                                    103



•   Conduct detailed CDM analyses of selected incidents only to insure that the general
    models of styles and cognitive activities are representative.

•   Do not assume that HCC decision-aids will be developed that support activities for each
    of a set of particular scenarios or mission types.

•   According to the literature on the CDM, sessions should last from between 1 - 2 hours.
    However, in some domains, the case stories that practitioners have to tell are rich
    indeed. The CDM sessions an last hours, and the process of transcription and analysis
    likewise can take hours. It is possible to split the CDM into two or three sessions. In a
    three-way split:

•   Encourage the Participant to create sketches or diagrams to describe the situation or
    any of its aspects. The Participant might be able to provide graphic resources from
    archived data on the case. These can all be integrated into the final case study.

•   The first session includes Step One (Incident Selection) and Two (Incident Recall).

•   After these two steps, the elicitor transcribes the notes and prepares for the second
    session.

•   The second session includes Steps Three (Retelling) and Four (Timelining).

•   After these two steps, the elicitor transcribes the notes and prepares for the third session.

•   The third session includes Steps Four (Timeline verification and Decision-Point
    analysis), Five (Deepening) and Six ("What-if" Queries).

•   In a two-way split:
        • The first session includes Steps One and Two (followed by a brief break during
           which the elicitor creates the Timeline) and then Step Three,
        • The second session includes Steps Four, Five and Six.
                                                       104


6.3. Boiler Plate Forms

6.3.0. Cover Form

Analyst
Participant

Time in Interview
Date              Date               Date     Date
Start             Start              Start    Start
Finish            Finish             Finish   Finish

Time in Transcription and analysis
Date               Date              Date     Date
Start              Start             Start    Start
Finish             Finish            Finish   Finish

Total Time
                                                                                                  105


6.3.1. Step One: Incident Selection

Start Time
Break
Finish Time

Instructions


In this interview we want to talk about the interesting and challenging experiences you
have had. We will provide you with guidance in the form of specific questions to support
you in laying out some of your past experiences.


Can you think of a case you were involved in that was particularly difficult or challenging? --
A time when your expertise was really put to the test?




Can you remember a situation where you did not feel you could trust or believe certain data,
such as a computer model or some other product--a situation where the guidance gave a different
answer than the one you came up with?




Can you remember a case when you went out on a limb?--Where the data might have suggested
something other than what you thought or another practitioner might have done things
differently, but you were confident that you were right?




(expand the cells and copy this table as needed)
                                                                                         106



6.3.2. Step Two: Incident Recall

Start Time
Break
Finish Time


Instructions


This (selected event) sounds interesting. Could you please to recount it again in a bit more
detail, from beginning to end.




(copy this table as needed)


6.3.3. Step Three: Incident Retelling
                                                                                       107


Date
               Transcription Retelling
Start Time
Finish Time



Instructions


Now what I'd like to do is read back your account. As I do so, please check to make sure
I've got it all right, and feel free to jump in and make corrections or add in details that
come to mind.



Elicitor's embellishments/modifications          Participant's added details




(expand the cells and copy this table as
needed)
                                                                                          108


6.3.4. Step Four: Timeline Verification and Decision Point Identification

Analyst drafts the timeline
Date
Start Time
Finish Time

Verification and Decision Point Identification
Date
Start Time
Finish Time



Instructions

Now I'd like to go through the event again and this time we will try to create a timeline of
the important occurrences--when things happened, what you saw, the decisions or
judgments you made, and the actions you took.



OSA = Observation / Situation Assessment              D = Decision          A = Action

Event                                                                  OSA, D,     Time
                                                                       A




(expand the cells and copy this table as needed)
                                                                                         109


6.3.5. Step Five: Deepening

Date
Start Time
Finish Time



Instructions


Now I want to go through the incident again, but this time we want to look at it in a little
detail and I'll guide you with some questions.
                                                                                                 110



PROBE TOPIC          PROBES


Cues & Knowledge     What were you seeing?

Analogues            Were you reminded of any previous experience?

Standard Scenarios   Does this case fit a standard or typical scenario?
                     Does it fit a scenario you were trained to deal with?

Goals                What were your specific goals and objectives at the time?

Options              What other courses of action were considered or were available?

Basis of Choice      How was this option selected/other options rejected?
                     What rule was being followed?

Mental Modeling      Did you imagine the possible consequences of this action?
                     Did you imagine the events that would unfold?

Experience           What specific training or experience was necessary or helpful in making this
                     decision?
                     What training, knowledge, or information might have helped?

Decision-Making      How much time pressure was involved in making this decision?
                     How long did it take to actually make this decision?

Aiding               If the decision was not the best, what training, knowledge, or information
                     could have helped?

Situation            If you were asked to describe the situation to a relief officer at this point,
Assessment           how would you summarize the situation?

Errors               What mistakes are likely at this point?
                     Did you acknowledge if your situation assessment or option selection were
                     incorrect?
                     How might a novice have behaved differently?

Hypotheticals        If a key feature of the situation had been different, what difference
                         would it have made in your decision?
                                                                   111




Event                                               OSA, D, A   Time




PROBE                                    RESPONSE




(Copy this set of cells for each event
in the timeline)
                                                                                           112



6.3.6. Step Six: "What-if" Queries

Date
Start Time
Finish Time



Instructions


Now I want to go through the incident one more time, but this time I want to analyze it a
little and to do that I'll ask you some hypothetical questions.



PROBES

What might have happened differently at this point?

What were the alternative decisions that could have been made here?

What choices were not made or what alternatives were rejected?

At this point in the incident, what if it had been a novice present, rather than someone
      with your level of proficiency?
Would they have noticed Y?
Would they have known to do X?"

What sorts of error might have been made at this point?
Why might errors have occurred here?
                                                                        113



Event                                                  OSA, D,   Time
                                                       A




PROBE                                       RESPONSE


(copy this set of cells for each event in
the timeline)
                                                                                            114


6.3.7. Final Integration (Re-telling, Timeline, Deepening, and What-if Steps)

In the final integration, the Researcher collapses all of the comments from the Timeline
Verification, Deepening and What-if steps into the text for each entry in the verified
timeline.

The result is a detailed case study expressed as a timeline, with each entry specified as
being either OSA, D, or A. Any sketches the Participant made during any of the steps, or
any graphic resources on the case that have been procured can be inserted at the
appropriate places.

                                                                           OSA,
Event and Comments                                                         D, A      Time




(expand the cells and copy this table as needed)
                                                                                            115


6.3.8. Decision Requirements Table

The Researcher examines each cell in the Final Integration and culls from it all statements that
refer to each of the categories in the DRT.

Cues and
Variables


Needed
information


Hypotheticals



Options



Goals



Rationale



Situation
Assessment


Time/effort
                                                                                              116


                                7. Goal Directed Task Analysis

                             Debra G. Jones and Mica R. Endsley
                                      SA Technologies

7.1. Introduction
In systems that involve a significant amount of cognitive work, conducted under dynamic and
changing conditions, developing and maintaining situation awareness (SA) is a significant and
critical task for decision makers, forming the basis for decision making and action. Developing
systems to effectively support decision makers as they carry out their mission requires that these
systems specifically support a wide range of SA requirements that are needed to support the
many key decisions and goals of the decision maker. Good system design needs to support not
just part of their decisions or tasks, but the full range of work that must be accomplished. To
meet this need, a cognitive task analysis methodology for determining the SA requirements of
decision makers has been developed (Endsley, 1993, 2000), which can be applied to a wide
variety of domains. Key features of this method are that it (a) focuses not on just determining a
list of data that is needed, but also identifies how that data is used and combined to form SA –
specifically the comprehension and projection requirements associated with a job, and (b)
provides a systematic approach for determining these requirements across the many varying
goals of a job.

This method is based on obtaining a detailed knowledge of the specific goals the decision maker
must accomplish and the decisions that people make in meeting each of these goals. As goals are
a central organizing feature for information seeking and interpretation in complex systems, they
form a foundation for this type of cognitive task analysis. A detailed goal structure provides a
systematic foundation for insuring that the full range of decisions and information requirements
involved in a person’s job are considered in the analysis process. The goals, decisions and
information requirements identified through this analysis provide the foundation for both the
creation of new systems and the evaluation of current systems. The ability of a system to support
decision makers in successfully accomplishing their mission depends on how well the system
supports their goals and information requirements.

This type of information typically can not be accessed easily via a traditional task analysis, as
traditional task analyses focus more on the physical tasks and functions that must be
accomplished and the processes by which these functions and tasks are completed. This focus is
restrictive in that it often does not identify the real information the decision maker needs to
accomplish goals, nor does it identify how the decision maker integrates information to gain an
understanding of the situation. In addition, they tend to assume that work is sequential and
linear, when in fact much of situation awareness involves a constant juggling back and forth
between multiple goals and processing of information in a very non-linear fashion. Thus,
although traditional task analyses can provide information that is vital to the design process,
alone they are insufficient for fully identifying the informational requirements of decision
makers interacting with complex, dynamic environments.

A Goal Directed Task Analysis (GDTA), addresses these issues by identifying the goals a
decision maker must achieve in order to accomplish a mission, the decisions that must be made
in order to accomplish these goals, and the specific information that is needed to support these
decisions (Endsley, Bolte, & Jones, 2003) (See Figure 1).
                                                                                               117



                                                               Information
                        Goals            Decisions            Requirements

                                 Figure 1: Elements of the GDTA

The GDTA documents what information decision makers need to perform their job and how they
integrate or combine information to address a particular decision. The GDTA is not developed
along task or procedural lines, is not sequenced according to a timeline, and does not reflect goal
priority, as priorities change dynamically depending on the situation. Rather, the GDTA focuses
on what information decisions makers would ideally like to know to meet each goal, even if that
information is not available given current technology. The ideal information is the focus of the
analysis, as focusing only on what current technology can provide would induce an artificial
ceiling effect that would obscure much of the information the decision maker would ideally like
to know. Further, the means an operator uses to acquire information are not the focus of this
analysis as methods for acquiring information can vary from person to person, from system to
system, from time to time, and with advances in technology.

The GDTA delineates the specific SA requirements a decision maker needs and determines the
nature and format of how this information must be integrated in order to achieve each goal
relevant to successful task completion. The purpose behind the creation of a GDTA is to identify
the information the decision maker really needs and uses. Once this information has been
identified, systems can be evaluated to determine how well the current design meets these needs,
and future designs can be created that take these needs into account from the beginning.

7.2. Elements of the GDTA
The GDTA has three main components: Goals, Decisions, and SA Requirements.
7.2.1. Goals
The goals a decision maker has with respect to a particular task, mission, or operation are one
element of the GDTA. Goals are higher-order objectives essential to successful job
performance. The highest level goal reflects the overall goal of the decision maker. For
example, the overall goal for the Army Operations Officer is to “Plan and Execute the Mission”.
Associated with this overall goal is a set of main goals that must be achieved in order to
accomplish the overall goal. Although the number of main goals varies depending on the
complexity and breadth of the domain under consideration, typically three to six main goals
describe the overall goal. Finally, each main goal may have a varying number of subgoals
associated with it. For more complex domains, subgoals may also have any number of
associated sub-goals. The goals increase in specificity as they move down the hierarchy (Figure
2).
                                                                                               118



                                          Overall Goal


       Main Goal                 Main Goal                Main Goal           Main Goal



                      sub-         sub-         sub-         sub-          sub-        sub-
                      goal         goal         goal         goal          goal        goal

                                     sub-
                                     goal

                       Figure 2: Example levels of goals within the GDTA
7.2.2. Decisions
The next element of the GDTA involves the decisions the decision maker must make in order to
achieve a particular goal. Decisions are associated with a specific goal, although a similar
decision may play into more than one goal. These decisions are essentially the questions the
decision maker must answer in order to achieve a specified goal. These questions require the
synthesis of information in order to understand the situation and how it will impact its associated
goal. For example, for the Army brigade intelligence officer goal “Determine impact of
environment on friendly forces” one of the questions that needs to be answered in order to
achieve this goal is “what is the impact of weather on friendly forces?”.
7.2.3. Situation Awareness Requirements
The final element of the GDTA involves the information needed to answer the questions that
form the decisions. These information needs are the decision maker’s situation awareness
requirements. Situation awareness (SA) can be defined as “the perception of the elements within
a volume of time and space, the comprehension of their meaning, and the projection of their
status in the near future” (Endsley, 1988, 1995). From this definition, 3 levels of situation
awareness can be identified: Level 1 which involves the most basic data that is perceived, Level
2 which involves an integration of Level 1 data elements, and Level 3 which involves projecting
how the integrated information will change over time. The SA requirements analysis identifies
and documents relevant information at all three of these levels.
7.3. Documenting the GDTA
Two main structures are utilized to document the GDTA: the goal hierarchy and the relational
hierarchy.

7.3.1. Goal Hierarchy
The primary goal hierarchy begins with the overall operator goal, from which the major goals are
identified and the subgoals essential for successfully achieving the major goal defined. The
structure and depth of the primary goal hierarchy will depend on the characteristics of the
domain under consideration. The information needed develop this goal hierarchy as well as for
subsequent components of the GDTA are generated through a variety of mechanisms (e.g.,
interviews, document reviews, etc) which will be discussed later.

The goal hierarchy is made up of the overall goal, the main goals, and the subgoals associated
with a particular task or domain. These goals and subgoals are numbered in outline style for
organizational purposes; the numbers are not intended to denote priority or sequential processes.
The main goals are numbered 1.0, 2.0, 3.0, etc., and the associated sub-goals are numbered 1.1,
1.2, etc. (Figure 3). Although the GDTA can be completed without this numbering system, using
                                                                                                         119


this convention has been found to facilitate discussion and revision of the GDTA. An example
of a GDTA for the Army S2 is shown in Figure 4.


                                       Overall Operator Goal


1.0 Major Goal             2.0 Major Goal            3.0 Major Goal          4.0 Major Goal


    1.1 Sub-goal               2.1 Sub-goal              3.1 Sub-goal           4.1 Sub-goal


    1.2 Sub-goal               2.2 Sub-goal              3.2 Sub-goal           4.2 Sub-goal


    1.3 Sub-goal                                         3.3 Sub-goal           4.3 Sub-goal


                                      Figure 3: GDTA goal hierarchy




                                          Plan and Execute Mission



    1.0 Develop plan to effectively     2.0 Provide ongoing             3.0 Accomplish Mission with
        execute mission                     operations                      least casualties


                                          2.1 Optimize placement           3.1 Determine Adjustments
                                              of units and assets              to plan needed to meet
                                                                               mission goals
                                          2.2 Provide force
                                              protection                   3.2 Synchronize & Integrate
                                                                               Combat Power in Field
                                          2.3 Supervise battle
                                              preparation


                                          2.4 Monitor battlefield /
                                              conduct recon

                           Figure 4: Army Operations Officer Goal Hierarchy

7.3.2. Relational Hierarchy
The relational hierarchy shows the relationship between the goals, the subgoals, the decisions
related to each subgoal, and the SA requirements relevant for each decision (See Figure 5). Each
of the elements in the relational hierarchy has a corresponding shape that, although not necessary
for the completion of a GDTA, does facilitate information transfer and comprehension. The
exact shape of the GDTA with respect to the number of goals and related sub-goals depends on
the complexity of the domain and the goal being analyzed. The GDTA is a flexible tool. The
structure can be varied however needed to most accurately represent the relationship between the
                                                                                               120


various goals, subgoals, decisions, and SA requirements essential to the domain under
consideration.

                                         1.0 Major Goal



              1.1                             1.2                             1.3
            Sub-goal                        Sub-goal                        Sub-goal


            Decision                        Decision                         Decision


     SA Requirements:              SA Requirements:                SA Requirements:
     Level 3 - Projection          Level 3 - Projection            Level 3 - Projection
       Level 2 - Comprehension       Level 2 - Comprehension         Level 2 - Comprehension
         Level 1 - Perception          Level 1 - Perception            Level 1 - Perception

Figure 5: Relational Hierarchy

7.3.3. Identifying Goals
Items that are appropriate for designation as goals are those items that require operator cognitive
effort and that are essential to successful task completion. They are higher-level items as
opposed to basic information requirements. They are a combination of sometimes competing
subgoals and objectives which must be accomplished in order to reach the person’s overall goal.
The goals themselves are not decisions that need to be made, although reaching them will
generally require that a set of decisions and a corresponding set of SA requirements be known.

At times, a subgoal will be essential to more than one goal. In these cases, the sub-goal should
be described in depth at one place in the GDTA, and then in subsequent utilizations, it can be
“called out”, referencing the earlier goal rather than repeating the goal in its entirety. Cross
referencing these callouts helps maintain the clarity of the GDTA, improve cohesiveness, support
consistency, and minimize redundancies. Utilizing callouts instead of repeating information is
beneficial to the interview process as well as these subgoals can be discussed at one point rather
than inadvertently taking up valuable interview time reviewing the same subgoals.

Performing a task is not a goal, in part because tasks are technology dependent. A particular
goal may be accomplished by means of different tasks depending on the systems involved. For
example, navigation may be done very differently in an automated cockpit as compared to a non-
automated cockpit. Yet, the SA needs associated with the goal of navigation are essentially the
same (e.g., location or deviation from desired course). Although tasks are not the same as goals,
the implications of the task should be considered. A goal may be addressed by a task the subject
matter expert mentions during the interview. By focusing on goals rather than tasks, future uses
of the GDTA will not be constrained. In some future system, this goal may be achieved very
differently than by the present task – for example, the information may be transferred through an
electronic network rather than with a verbal report.

Goal names should be descriptive enough to explain the nature of the subsequent branch (i.e., the
related subgoals, decisions, and SA requirements) and broad enough to encompass all elements
related to the goal being described. Further, the goals should be just that – goals, not tasks nor
information needs. For example, physical tasks are not goals: rather they are things the operator
                                                                                                  121


must physically accomplish, such as filling out a report or calling a coworker. Rather, goals
require the expenditure of higher-order cognitive resources such as predicting an enemy course
of action (COA) or determining the effects of an enemy’s COA on the outcome of the battle.

7.3.4. Defining Decisions
The decisions that are needed to effectively meet each goal in the goal hierarchy are listed
beneath the goals to which they correspond (see Figure 5). Decisions reflect the need to
synthesize information in order to understand how that information is going to affect the system
both now and in the future. Although decisions are presented in the form of questions, not all
questions qualify as decisions. Questions that can be answered “yes/no’ are not typically
considered appropriate decisions in the GDTA. For example, the question “Does the commander
have all the information needed on enemy courses of action?” can be answer with yes/no and
does not qualify as a decision. On the other hand “how will enemy courses of action affect
friendly objectives?” requires more than a yes/no answer and is a decision that is pertinent to the
person’s goals. Further, if a question’s only purpose is to discern a single piece of information, it
is not a decision, rather it is an information requirement and belongs in the SA requirements
portion of the hierarchy.

When a single goal or subgoal has more than one relevant decision, these decisions can be listed
separately or together within the goal hierarchy. These decisions (and their corresponding SA
requirements) can be listed separately or bunched in the hierarchy, depending on personal
preference and the size of the goal hierarchy. One advantage for listing them separately is that
the SA requirements for each decisions can be easily discerned from each other. This aids in the
process of insuring that all information needed for a decision is present. If after final analysis the
SA requirements for several decisions show complete overlap, they can then be combined in the
representation for conciseness.

7.3.5. Delineating SA requirements
Decisions are posed in the form of questions, and the associated SA requirements provide the
information needed to answer the questions. To determine the SA requirements, each decision
should be analyzed individually to identify all the information the operator needs to make that
decision. The information requirements should be listed without reference to technology or the
manner in which the information is obtained. When delineating the SA requirements, be sure to
fully identify the item for clarity – for example, instead of ‘assets’, identify ‘friendly assets’ or
‘enemy assets’. Although numerous resources can be utilized to develop an initial list of SA
requirements (e.g., interview notes or job manuals), once a preliminary list is created, the list
needs to be verified by domain experts.

Often, experts will express many of their information needs at a data level (e.g., altitude,
airspeed, pitch). Further probing may be required to find out why they need to know this
information. This probing will prompt them to describe the higher-level SA requirements – how
this information is used. For example, altitude may be used (along with other information) to
assess deviations from assigned altitude (Level 2 SA) and deviations from terrain (Level 2 SA).
When the expert provides higher order information requirements (e.g., “I need to know the
enemy strengths”), further probing will be required to find all of the lower-level information that
goes into that assessment (e.g., ask “What about the enemy do you need to know to determine
their strengths?”).
                                                                                              122


The SA requirements are listed in the GDTA according to its level of SA by using an indented
stacked format (see Figure 5). This format helps ensure the SA requirements at each level are
considered and generally helps with the readability of the document. However, the three levels
of SA are general descriptions that aid in thinking about SA. At times, definitively categorizing
an SA requirement into a particular level will not be possible. For example in air traffic control
the amount of separation between two aircraft is both a Level 2 SA requirement (distance now)
and a Level 3 SA requirement (distance in the future along their trajectories). Further, not all
decisions will include elements at all three levels – in some cases, a Level 2 requirement may not
have a corresponding Level 3 item, particularly if the related decision is addressing current,
rather than future, operations.

At times, a series of SA requirements will be essential for numerous goals. In these cases, this
frequently used subset of SA requirements can be turned into callout blocks with a descriptive
title. For example, weather issues at all levels of SA may be of concern across many subgoals in
the hierarchy. To decrease complexity and reduce redundancy, a weather callout block can be
created. This block can be called within the SA requirements section of multiple subgoals as
‘Weather’ and fully defined at the end of the GDTA (See Figure 6). Consistency is important for
the SA requirements, and SA requirement callout blocks can be useful to ensure that each time a
frequently used item is referenced all of its relevant information requirements are included.

                                                                                Weather
                                                                        Icing
                             1.3.2                                      Projected Weather
             Determine Ability of Assets to Collect                     Inversion
                     Needed Information                                 Temperature
                                                                        Barometric pressure
                                                                        Precipitation
                                                                        Thunder storms
                 Can I safely deploy my assets?
                                                                        Hurricanes
                                                                        Tornadoes
                                                                        Monsoons/ Flash
 • Projected safety of deployment for assets                            flooding
   • Level of risk to the assets in the area                            Tides
          • Projected enemy COAs                                        Cloud Ceiling
          • Projected ability of enemy to counterattack asset           Lightening
          • Terrain                                                     Winds
          • Weather                                                        Directions
                                                                           Magnitudes
          • Commo range
                                                                           Surface winds
   • Ability to move the assets stealthily
                                                                            Aloft winds
          • Areas of cover and concealment                              Visibility
                   § Terrain                                            Illumination
                   § Time of Year                                       Fog
   • Security needed to protect asset                                   Day/Night
   • Available force protection                                         Ambient Noise
   • Time needed to collect the information                             Moon Phases
   • Accessibility of the area                                          Sand storms


         Figure 6: Subset of Army Intelligence Officer GDTA showing Weather Call-out.
                                                                                                123


7.4. GDTA Methodology
7.4.1. Step 1: Review Domain
Prior to beginning a goal-directed task analysis, a general understanding of the domain of interest
should be developed. This understanding can be gained by reviewing relevant documents
pertaining to the domain of interest (e.g., job descriptions, job taxonomies, manuals, performance
standards). This review accomplishes several things. First, it provides an overview of the
domain and the nature of the decision maker’s job. Second, it provides a background for
understanding the lingo the interviewee is accustomed to speaking. Finally, the interview should
go more smoothly (and the interviewer’s credibility enhanced) if the interviewer can “talk the
talk.” The interviewer must be cautious, however, not to develop a preconceived notion of what
the decision maker’s goals are likely to be and, as a result, to seek only confirming information
in the interview.
7.4.2. Step 2: Initial interviews
Interviews with subject matter experts (SMEs) are an indispensable source for information
gathering for the GDTA. Whenever possible, each SME should be interviewed individually.
When more than one person is interviewed at a time, the data collection may be negatively
impacted if one participant is more vocal than the other or if the participants have dissenting
opinions regarding relevant goals and decisions. Each interview begins with an introduction of
the purpose and intent of the data collection effort and a quick review of the interviewee’s
experience. Next, the SME is asked about the overall goals relevant for successful task
completion. As the SME explains the overall goals, make note of topics to pursue during the
interview. This process of noting potential questions as they come to mind should be followed
throughout the entire interview. Relying on memory for questions may work for some, but for
most the questions will be forgotten (but crop up again after the interview when the practitioner
is trying to organize the GDTA).

Obtaining time with domain experts is often difficult, so maximizing the time when it is
available is essential. Several suggestions can be offered to this end. First, conduct the interview
with two interviewers present to minimize downtime; one interviewer can continue with
questions while the other interviewer quickly reviews and organizes notes or questions. The
presence of two interviewers will also have a benefit beyond the interview; constructing the goal
hierarchy is easier when two people with a common frame of reference (developed in part from
the interview session) work on the task. Next, limit the number of interviews performed on any
given day. Time is needed to organize information gleaned from each interview and to update the
charts to insure that subsequent sessions are as productive as possible. Interviewing too many
people without taking time to update notes and charts can negatively impact not only the
interview sessions but also the resulting data quality. Finally, interviewer fatigue can be a
considerable factor if too many interviews are scheduled without a break or if the interviews last
too long. Two hours per session is generally the maximum recommended.
7.4.3. Step 3: Develop the goal hierarchy
Once the initial interviews have been completed, the task becomes one of organizing all the
disparate pieces of information collected during the interview into a working preliminary goal
structure that will allow for adequate portrayal of the information requirements. Determining the
overall goal is usually fairly straightforward. The art of the process comes in when delineating
the goals essential for the success of the overall goal. Typically more questions are raised than
answered during the first attempts to develop a goal hierarchy. Nonetheless, creating a
preliminary goal structure, even if incomplete or sketchy, is essential and will aid in focusing
future data collection efforts.
                                                                                               124


Although each practitioner will develop a unique style for developing the goal hierarchy, one
approach is to begin by reorganizing the notes from the interviews into similar categories. This
categorization can be done by beginning each new category on a separate page and adding
statements from the notes to these categories as appropriate. Sorting information in this manner
helps illuminate areas that constitute goals and may make it easier to create a preliminary goal
hierarchy. Although defining an adequate goal hierarchy is the foundation of the GDTA, in the
early stages this hierarchy will not be perfect, and an inordinate amount of time should not be
spent trying to make it so. Further interviews with experts will most likely shed new light that
will require that the goal hierarchy be revamped by adding, deleting, or rearranging goals.
Nonetheless, developing even a preliminary goal structure at this point in the process allows for a
baseline for future iterations, helps in the process of aggregating information, and helps direct
information gathering efforts during the next round of interviews.
7.4.4. Step 4: Identify decisions and SA requirements
Once a preliminary goal hierarchy has been developed, the associated decisions and SA
requirements can be developed to the extent possible given the amount of data collected. Notes
taken during the interview can be preliminarily linked with the associated decision and goals.
Further, after completing the process of organizing the interview notes into the relational
hierarchy, existing manuals and documentation can be referenced to help fill in the holes.
Caution should be exercised however, since these sorts of documents tend to be procedural and
task specific in nature. Information in the GDTA is concerned with goals and information
requirements, not current methods and procedures for obtaining the information or performing
the task. Although operators often don’t explicitly follow written procedures found in the related
documentation, evaluating the use of this information in the hierarchy can help to insure the
GDTA is complete and can spark good discussions of what information the decision maker
actually needs to achieve a goal.
7.4.5. Step 5: Additional interviews / SME review of GDTA
Once a draft GDTA is created, it can serve as a tool during future interview sessions. One way
to begin an interview session is to show the primary goal hierarchy to the interviewee and talk
about whether the goal hierarchy captures all the relevant goals. After this discussion, one
section of the GDTA can be selected for further review, and each component of that section (I.e.,
goals, subgoals, decisions, and SA requirements) can be discussed at length. The draft can be
used to probe the interviewee for completeness (e.g., “what else do you need to know to assess
this?”) and to determine higher-level SA requirements (“how does this piece of data help you
answer this question?”). Showing the entire GDTA to the participant is generally not a good
idea, as the apparent complexity of the GDTA can be overwhelming to the participant and
consequently counter-productive to data collection. If time permits after discussing one section
of the GDTA, another subset can be selected for in-depth discussion.
7.4.6. Step 6: Revise the GDTA
After each round of interviews is complete, the GDTA should be revised to reflect new
information. New information gleaned from iterative interviews allows for reorganizing and
condensing of the goals within the structure to create better logical consistency. For example,
when several participants bring up a low-level goal as an important facet of the job, the goal may
need to be moved to a higher place in the hierarchy. Furthermore, as more information is
uncovered concerning the breadth of information encompassed by the various goals and
subgoals, the goals and subgoals can often be refined to create a more descriptive and accurate
category. Often goals will seem to fit more than one category. In these cases, the goals can be
represented in detail in one place in the GDTA and referenced (i.e., “called out”) to other places
within the hierarchy as needed.
                                                                                              125


As the GDTA is reviewed further, commonalities become apparent that can be used to assist in
refining the charts. Consequently, after defining a preliminary set of goals, the goal structure
should be reviewed to determine if goals that originally seemed distinct, albeit similar, can
actually be combined into a single category. Combining similar goals will reduce repetition in
the analysis. For example, goals involving planning and re-planning rarely need to be listed as
separate major goals; often representing them as branches under the same major goal is sufficient
to adequately delineate any distinct decisions or SA requirements. When combining goals that
are similar, all of the information requirements associated with the goals should be retained. If
the information requirements are very similar but not quite the same, separate subgoals may be in
order, or perhaps future interviews will resolve the inconsistency. If several goals seem to go
together, this clustering might be an indication that the goals should be kept together under the
umbrella of a goal one level higher in the hierarchy.
7.4.7. Step 7: Repeat steps 5 & 6
Additional interviews with subject matter experts should be conducted and the GDTA revised
until a comprehensive GDTA has been developed. After discussing a set of GDTA charts with
one participant, the charts should be updated to reflect the changes before being shown to
another participant. Showing a chart to another participant before it has been edited may not be
the best use of time; interviewer notations and crossed out items on the charts can be confusing
to the participant and thus counterproductive.
7.4.8. Step 8: Validate the GDTA
To help insure that the final GDTA is as complete and accurate as possible, it should be validated
by a larger group of subject matter experts. Printouts of the final GDTA can be distributed to
experts with instructions on how to interpret it, and the SMEs asked to identify missing
information or errors. Needed corrections can then be made. In some cases a particular expert
will report that he or she does not consider certain information or do particular subsets of the
GDTA. This feedback does not necessarily mean that these items should be eliminated,
however. If other experts report using that data or performing those goals, then these
components should remain part of the GDTA. Some people will have had slightly different
experiences than others and simply may have never been in a position to execute all possible
subgoals. As the GDTA will form the basis for future design, the full breadth of possible
operations and information requirements should be considered.

An additional way to validate the GDTA is through observation of actual or simulated operations
by experienced personnel in the position. While it can be difficult to always know exactly what
the operators are thinking (unless they are instructed to ‘think aloud,’ performing a verbal
protocol), these observations can be used to check the completeness of the GDTA. It should be
possible to trace observed actions, statements, and activities back to sections of the GDTA. If
people are observed to be performing tasks that there is no apparent reason for in the GDTA, or
looking for information that is not identified in the GDTA, follow up should be conducted to
determine why. Any additions to the GDTA that are needed should be made based on these
validation efforts.
7.5. Simplifying the Process
Creating a GDTA can be a seemingly overwhelming task at times. Several suggestions can be
offered to simplify this process.
• Organize the notes into the preliminary GDTA as soon as possible after the first interview
    while the conversation is still fresh in memory.
• Once a draft of the GDTA has been created, number the pages to facilitate discussion and
    minimize confusion. During a collaborative session, locating page 7 is easier than locating
    Subgoal number 4.2.3.1.
                                                                                              126


•   Using paper copies of the GDTA when reorganizing the GDTA is often easier than trying to
    edit it in electronic format, as the pages can be arrayed across the table, elements compared,
    and changes notated quickly. Once changes have been decided, notate all the changes on a
    clean copy for review before updating the electronic format.
• As soon as the reorganization process allows, make a new primary goal hierarchy to provide
    structure for other changes.
• While the GDTA is being developed, make notes of any questions that arise concerning
    where or how something fits. This list can be brought to the next interview session for
    clarification.
• Do not get too concerned about delineating the different SA levels; these are not concrete,
    black and white items, and it is conceivable that a particular item can change SA levels over
    time. Thinking about the different SA levels is mainly an aid to help in the consideration of
    how information is used.
• If the same thing is being considered at various places to achieve essentially the same goal,
    combine them. For example, the questions ‘How does the enemy COA affect ours?’ and
    ‘How does the enemy COA affect battle outcome?’ are essentially the same and can be
    combined.
• During the interview listen closely for predictions or projections the person may be making
    when reaching a decision. Try to distinguish between what they are assessing about the
    current situation (e.g., ‘where is everyone at?’ – the Level 1 SA requirement “location of
    troops”) and what they are projecting to make a decision, (e.g., “where will the enemy strike
    next?” – the Level 3 SA requirement “projected location of enemy attack”). Distinguishing
    between these types of statements will assist the practitioner in following up on higher order
    level SA requirements and documenting lower level SA requirements.
7.6. Conclusion
Creating a comprehensive GDTA for a particular job can be difficult. It often takes many
interviews with subject matter experts; it is not uncommon for it to take anywhere from 3 to 10
sessions, depending on the complexity of the domain. Even then, there can be a fair degree of
subjectivity involved on the part of the analyst and the experts. These problems are common to
all cognitive task analysis methods, and GDTA is no exception. Nonetheless, the GDTA
methodology provides a sound approach to delineating the SA requirements decision makers
have with respect to specific goals. Understanding these SA requirements will assist designers in
evaluating and designing systems to ensure that the decision maker’s efforts to build and
maintain a high level of situation awareness are supported to the maximum extent possible.

The resulting analysis from this effort feeds directly into efforts to design systems to support
situation awareness, in that the structure provides
     (a) a clear delineation of what the individual really needs to know, allowing designers to
         integrate data in meaningful ways on displays,
     (b) key information on what information needs to be grouped together to support decisions,
     (c) guidance as to how information and decisions relate to common goals, a critical
         organizing feature for system design, and
     (d) information on critical cues/situations that dictate necessary shifts in priority between
         situation classes and goals.
 This information is used directly in SA-Oriented Design (Endsley, Bolte, & Jones, 2003) to
 create systems that support SA, based on a set of clearly defined design principles. In addition,
 the SA requirements identified through the GDTA can be used to create objective metrics for
 evaluating the degree to which different design concepts and technologies are successful in
 supporting the SA of decision makers (Endsley, 2000). Overall, the GDTA provides a useful
                                                                                            127

tool for assessing and organizing the situation awareness requirements associated with cognitive
work in a wide variety of domains and applications.

Army Fire Support Officer GDTA
Protocols for CTA                                                                            p.128




                                                 Plan and Integrate Lethal and Non-lethal Fires into
                                                               Scheme of Maneuver



                    1.0 Support Scheme of                       2.0 Select Best Asset                  3.0 Execute Fire
                        Maneuver                                    for Target                             Support Plan


                       1.1 Choose Targets                                                                 3.1 Find Desired
                                                                                                              Targets



                       1.2 Array& Allocate                                                                3.2 Coordinate Fire
                           Fire Support Assets                                                                Support Mission


                                                                                                              3.2.1 Coordinate
                                                                                                                    Changes to


                                                                                                              3.2.2 Minimize
                                                                                                                    Collateral D


                                                                                                          3.3 Deliver Fires
Protocols for CTA                                                             p.129




                                                  1.1 Choose targets




                                                Should identified target be
                                                        engaged?



                    • Target prioritization                     • Impact of allocating resources to
                       o Target value                             target on ability to complete
                          § Target relevance to enemy             mission
                            plans/intentions                       o Resources required to engage
                             • Projected enemy                       target
                               plans/intentions                    o Time cost of engaging target
                             • Resources needed for                   § Projected route of artillery
                               enemy plans/intentions                   units
                          § HVTs                                      § Location of artillery units
                       o Target payoff                                § Location of targets
                          § Target relevance to friendly              § Projected route of targets
                            plans/intentions                          § Weapons/ammo required to
                          § Projected ability of target to              engage target
                            interfere with friendly plans          o Weapons/ammo required for plan
                          § Projected impact of target on       • Likelihood successful target
                            friendlies                            engagement
                             • Weapons type/range                  o Target location
                             • Weapons fires                       o Target level of protection
                          § HPTs                                   o Target mobility (dwell time)
                          § Friendly COAs/scheme of             • Effects of prior fires on target
                            maneuver
                    • Target allowability
                       o ROE
                       o Target location in zone
                       o Confidence in target ID
                       o Confidence in target location
  Protocols for CTA                                                                       p.130

                                                             1.2 Array Assets to
                                                                 Best Advantage




       How accurate is my              How does the enemy threaten             Is plan supportable with              How can
 representation of the battlefield?     the scheme of maneuver?                        artillery?



• Confidence in information           • Projected Impact on Friendly       • CO Intent                         • Projected imp
   o Verified information               COA and maneuver                   • Projected impact of weapon           o Time cons
   o Assumptions                      • CO Intent                            on enemy                             o Time avail
• Projected friendly movement /       • Terrain                               o Range and location                o Time requ
  actions (Bde, Adjacent Bde)         • Projected friendly (all)              o Ammo capabilities              • Projected abi
   o Current friendly                   movement / action                     o Level of protection of         • Projected tim
     maneuver/actions                    o Current friendly maneuver /          enemy                            concealment
      § Friendly location/strength         action                             o Timing of plan (ability to     • Projected frie
      § Routes of movement                  § Location / strength               meet with weapons)                o Current m
      § Observer location                   § Routes of movement           • Projected availability of other         § Locatio
• Projected friendly movement /       • Projected enemy movement /           friendly (non-organic) assets     • Projected ene
  actions (Artillery Battery)           action                                o Supporting fires (artillery,      o Current en
   o Current maneuver/actions            o Current enemy                        mortars, naval gunfire, air          § Enemy
      § Location/strength                  maneuvers/action                     support)                             § Enemy
      § Weapons                             § Enemy location / strength       o Aircraft availability                § Enemy
      § Ammo type/quantity                  § Enemy weapons                   o Support artillery                    § Enemy
      § Radar types/location                § Enemy weapon coverage              § From higher                 • Terrain
   o Coverage of battlefield                  area                               § From adjacent                  o Cover and
• Projected enemy movement/action           § Enemy knowledge of              o Electronic Warfare                   § Position
   o Current enemy maneuver/action            Friendlies (all)                                                       § Maskin
      § Enemy location/strength             § Assumptions about enemy                                             o Foliage eff
      § Enemy weapons                       § Enemy doctrine                                                      o Munitions
      § Enemy weapon coverage area                                                                                o Protection
      § Enemy knowledge of                                                                                        o Impact on
        friendlies (all)                                                                                          o Impact on
      § Assumptions about enemy                                                                                   o Impact on
      § Enemy doctrine                                                                                            o Weather
• Special areas of interest                                                                                       o Ability to
   o Fire support coordination                                                                                    o Line of sig
     measures                                                                                                     o Ability to
   o Maneuver boundaries                                                                                       • Area of opera
Protocols for CTA                                                                 p.131

                                                   2.0 Select Best Asset
                                                        for Target




    Will the asset achieve the desired          Is this the best utilization of                        Are the
                  effect?                                 resources?                                      wea


• Projected ability to acquire target    • Priority and quantity of targets not           • Projected impact o
   o Visibility of target                  covered by weapons                                o Likelihood of co
      § Weather                             o Projected effect of weapon on target              § Target locatio
      § Terrain                                § Weapon availability (lethal/non-               § Proximity of
      § Day / night                              lethal)                                           • Projected l
• Projected effect of weapon on target            • Weapon location                             § Proximity of
   o Objective (suppress / destroy /              • Weapon type                                    • Projected l
     neutralize / shape)                          • Weapon strength/status                      § Proximity of
   o Level of protection of target                • Weapon allocation                             target
      § Target location                        § Ammo availability                              § Ability to mo
      § Target size                               • Ammo level/type                               weapons
      § Target movement                           • Ammo utilization rate                       § Level of prot
      § Target cover/ concealment                 • Projected ammo resupply                        • Cover of fr
         • Terrain                             § Availability non-organic resources                • Area of op
         • Prepared positions               o Target prioritization                             § Probability of
      § Target armored protection           o Availability of more responsive                      • Dud rate
• Projected System effects                    system                                               • Targeting p
   o Weapon type                            o Availability of lower level of support                  o Probabi
   o Weapon Coverage area (range)             to achieve desired results                              o Weapon
   o Weapon limitations                                                                               o Ammo t
      § Environmental Acoustics                                                                 § Projected disp
   o Weapon location                                                                               • Type of am
   o Weapon capabilities                                                                           • Surroundin
   o Ammo available                                                                          o ROE
   o Ammo required for target                                                                o Projected impac
   o Footprint                                                                                 mission outcom
   o Dispersion pattern                                                                         § Target priorit
• Projected action of enemy following                                                           § Projected leth
  weapons execution                                                                               troops/civilia
                                                                                                § Availability o
                                                                                                  desired effect
Protocols for CTA                                                                p.132


                                                          3.0 Execute Fire
                                                          Support Mission




                    3.1 Find & Acquire                   3.2 Coordinate Fire                      3.3 Delive
                      Desired Targets                     Support Mission


                                                                                            Are delivery ass
                What is the best position for
                                                              3.2.1 Coordinate               and able to del
                         observers?
                                                              Changes to Plan

                                                                                         Indirect fire
      • Likelihood for being able to detect enemy
        potential positions                                                              • Ability to get alloc
         o Observer capabilities (range/viewability)                                       position (range)
                                                               3.2 Minimize              • Availability of cor
         o Ability to get equipment and people into          Collateral Damage
           position to sight and acquire target                                            type/quantity
         o Impact of terrain on viewability of targets                                   • Communications w
         o Impact of weather on viewability of targets
         o Risk level to observers                                                       Close Air Support
            § Cover/concealment available to observers                                   • Allocated asset in
         o Accessability of area (in/out)                                                • Correct ammo typ
         o Projected enemy positions/movements                                           • Communication w
            § Projected enemy intent                                                     • Permissive weathe
      • Likelihood of being able to communicate
        detections
         o Comm. Capabilities
         o Projected enemy interference capabilities
      • Best placement of weapon system
      • Need for personnel protection
      • Projected ability to protect personnel
         o Personnel location/routes
         o Level of skill of personnel
         o Visibility of personnel/weapons
            § Areas of cover/concealment
            § Enemy locations
            § Enemy capabilities
Protocols for CTA                                                              p.133




                                                       3.2 Coordinate Fire
                                                        Support Mission




                               3.2.1 Coordinate                               3.2.2 Minimize
                               changes to plan                               Collateral Damage



                        Is everyone aware of impending                   Is the potential for collateral
                            fires and residual effects?                       damage minimized?


                    • Coordinate changes to plan                    • Friendly troops potentially effected by
                       o Reallocate fire support assets               fires
                       o Revise fire support coordination              o Projected friendly troop movements
                         measures                                      o Projected friendly location
                       o Refine target location                        o Projected duration of weapons
                    • Info communicated to troops                        effects
                       o Comm to troops successful                     o Projected area of weapons coverage
                       o Comm. Availability                               § Weapons/Ammo type
                    • Calls for fire requests on target                   § Timing of fires
                       o Priority of unit requesting fire                 § Location of fires
                         support                                    • Projected impact on civilians
                                                                       o Proximity of civilians to target
                                                                       o Projected location of civilians
                                                                       o Ability to move friendlies /civilians
                                                                         to avoid weapons
                                                                       o Level of protection of
                                                                         friendlies/civilians
                                                                          § Cover of friendlies/civilians
Protocols for CTA                                                               p.134


                                         8. References

Burton, A. M., Shadbolt, N. R., Hedgecock, A. P., and Rugg, G. (1987). A formal evaluation of a
         knowledge elicitation techniques for expert systems: Domain 1. In D. S. Moralee (Ed.),
         Research and development in expert systems, Vol 4. (pp. 35-46). Cambridge: University
         Press
Burton, A. M., Shadbolt, N. R., Rugg, G., and Hedgecock, A. P. (1988). A formal evaluation of
        knowledge elicitation techniques for expert systems: Domain 1. Proceedings, First
        European Workshop on Knowledge Acquisition for Knowledge-Based Systems (pp. D3.1-
        21). Reading, UK: Reading University.
Chase, W. G., and Simon, H. A. (1973). Perception in chess. Cognitive Psychology, 5, 55-81.
Endsley, M. R. (1988). Design and evaluation for situation awareness enhancement, Proceedings
        of the Human Factors Society 32nd Annual Meeting (pp. 97-101). Santa Monica: Human
        Factors Society.
Endsley, M. R. (1993). A survey of situation awareness requirements in air-to-air combat
        fighters. International Journal of Aviation Psychology, 3, 157-168.
Endsley, M. R. (1995). Toward a theory of situation awareness in dynamic systems. Human
        Factors, 37, 32-64.
Endsley, M. R. (2000). Direct measurement of situation awareness: Validity and use of SAGAT.
        In M. R. Endsley and D. J. Garland (Eds.), Situation awareness analysis and
        measurement (pp. 147-174). Mahwah, NJ: LEA.
Endsley, M. R., Bolte, B., and Jones, D. G. (2003). Designing for situation awareness: An
        approach to user-centered design. London: Taylor and Francis.
Ericsson, K. A., and Simon, H. (1993). Protocol analysis: Verbal reports as data (2nd. Ed).
        Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Fox, J. (Ed.) (1987). The essential Moreno. New York: Springer.
Gilbreth, F. B. (1911). Motion study. New York: Van Nostrand.
Gilbreth, F. B., and Gilbreth L. M. (1919). Fatigue study: The elimination of humanity's greatest
         unnecessary waste. New York: MacMillan.
Hoffman, R. R. (1986). "Extracting experts' knowledge." Report, U.S. Air Force Summer
         Faculty Research Program.
Hoffman, R. R. (1987). The problem of extracting the knowledge of experts from the perspective
        of experimental psychology. AI Magazine, 8, 53-67.
Hoffman, R. R. (1998). How can expertise be defined? Implications of research from cognitive
        psychology. In R. Williams and J. Fleck (Eds.), Exploring expertise: Issues and
        perspectives. London: Macmillan.
Hoffman, R. R., Coffey, J. W., and Ford, K. M. (2000). "A Case Study in the Research Paradigm
        of Human-Centered Computing: Local Expertise in Weather Forecasting." Report on the
        Contract, "Human-Centered System Prototype," National Technology Alliance.
Hoffman, R. R., Crandall, B., and Shadbolt, N. (1998). A case study in cognitive task analysis
        methodology: The Critical Decision Method for the elicitation of expert knowledge.
        Human Factors, 40, 254-276.
Hoffman, R. R., and Lintern, G. (2005). Eliciting knowledge from experts. In A. Ericsson, N.
        Charness, P. Feltovich, and R. Hoffman (Eds.), Cambridge handbook of expertise and
        expert performance. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Hoffman, R. R., Militello, L., and Eccles, D. (2005). “Perspectives on Cognitive Task Analysis.”
        Report to the Advanced Decision Architectures Collaborative Alliance, Army Research
        Laboratory, Adelphi, MD.
Protocols for CTA                                                                 p.135


Hoffman, R. R., Shadbolt, N., Burton, A. M., and Klein, G. A. (1995). Eliciting knowledge from
        experts: A methodological analysis. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
        Processes, 62, 129-158.
Hoffman, R. R., Trafton, G., and Roebber, P. (2005), Minding the weather: How expert
        forecasters reason. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Johnston, N. (2003). The Paradox of Rules: Procedural Drift in Commercial Aviation. In R.
        Jensen, (Ed), Proceedings of the Twelfth International Symposium on Aviation Psych (pp.
        630-635) Dayton, OH: Wright State University.
Kidd, A. L., and Cooper, M. B. (1985). Man-machine interface issues in the construction and use
        of an expert system. International Journal of Man-Machine Studies, 22, 91-102.
Klein, G., Calderwood, R., and MacGregor, D. (1989). Critical decision method of eliciting
        knowledge. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, 19, 462-472.
Kolodner, J. L. (1991). Improving decision making through case-based decision aiding. The AI
        Magazine, 12, 52-68.
Koopman, P., and Hoffman, R. R., (November/December 2003). Work-Arounds, Make-Work,
        and Kludges. IEEE: Intelligent Systems, pp. 70-75.
McClelland, D. C. (1998). Identifying competencies with behavioral-event interviews.
        Psychological Science, 9, 331-339.
McDonald, N., Corrigan, S. and Ward, M. (2002). Cultural and Organizational factors in system
        safety: Good people in bad systems. Proceedings of the 2002 International Conference
        on Human-Computer Interaction in Aeronautics (HCI-Aero 2002) (pp. 205-209). Menlo
        Park, CA: American Association for Artificial Intelligence Press.
Ohanian, R. (1990). Construction and validation of a scale to measure celebrity endorsers’
        perceived expertise, trustworthiness, and attractiveness. Journal of Advertising, 19, 39-
        52.
Prerau, D. (1989). Developing and managing expert systems: Proven techniques for business and
        industry. Reading, MA: Addison Wesley.
Rasmussen, J., Pejtersen, A. M., and Schmidt, K. (1990). Taxonomy for cognitive work analysis.
        (Report No. RISÆ-M-2871). Roskilde, Denmark: Riso National Laboratory.
Renard, G. (1968). Guilds in the Middle Ages. New York: A. M. Kelley.
Senjen, R. (1988). Knowledge acquisition by experiment: Developing test cases for an expert
        system. AI Applications in Natural Resource Management, 2, 52-55.
Slade, S. (1991). Case-based reasoning: A research paradigm. The AI Magazine, 42-55.
Stein, E. (1992). A method to identify candidates for knowledge acquisition. Journal of
        Management and Information Systems, 9, 161-178.
Stein, E. (1997). A look at expertise from a social perspective. In P. J. Feltovich, K. M. Ford, and
        R. R. Hoffman (Eds.). Expertise in context: Human and machine (pp. 181-194).
        Cambridge, MA: MIT Press/AAAI Books.
Thorndike, E. L. (1920). The selection of military aviators. U.S. Air Service, 1 and 2, 14-17; 28-
        32, 29-31.
Vicente, K. J. (1999). Cognitive work analysis: Toward safe, productive, and healthy computer-
        based work. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Wood, L. E., and Ford, K. M. (1993). Structuring interviews with experts during knowledge
        elicitation. In K. M. Ford and J. M. Bradshaw (Eds.), Knowledge acquisition as modeling
        (pp. 71-90). New York: Wiley.
