                        Section 2 – The Hard Sell - (30 Marks)
                         This Section has a weighting of 30%
                                         Time Permitted : 60 Minutes

INTRODUCTION
The fantastic model you prepared earlier has now been reviewed and returned to you, some minor adjustments have
been made. Functionality has been added to escalate the traffic classes separately and to cater for the expected
increase of in the proportion of tag trips over time. Your director now has a much better understanding of the
opportunity the Metro Connect investment presents.

Discussions continue to progress however a presentation of your analysis is required by the Board before the
acquisition strategy can be approved. As a result, your director has arranged a meeting with the Board and requested
you prepare a concise ‘dashboard’ (or tear-sheet) illustrating the key operational and financial outputs.

You have 60 minutes to create a Letter or A4 size dashboard for the Board illustrating your findings visually. Your
dashboard will be printed prior to providing it to the Board, as such there is no benefit to making your dashboard
dynamic.

The Dashboard

The directors have raised a number of ideas throughout the morning which they would like to see in addition to any
other information you consider crucial to the evaluation of the business:

          -    Summary Financial Statements (annually for 5 years)
          -    Debt profile
          -    Traffic profile

In particular you should include information useful to the CEO/CFO in relation to the proposed transaction.

You will be required to submit your workbook containing the model and dashboards.

CONVENTIONS AND PRESENTATION
Use the logo and color scheme below to style your dashboard. (The electronic versions are included in the provided
model):




This question focuses on both the data included and the presentation. Layout and visual aesthetics will be
considered in the Judges’ assessment of this question.
