An Uncommon Task: Participatory Design in Legal AI

FERNANDO DELGADO, Cornell University, USA
SOLON BAROCAS, Microsoft Research and Cornell University, USA
KAREN LEVY, Cornell University, USA


Despite growing calls for participation in AI design, there are to date few empirical studies of what these
processes look like and how they can be structured for meaningful engagement with domain experts. In this
paper, we examine a notable yet understudied AI design process in the legal domain that took place over a
decade ago, the impact of which still informs legal automation efforts today. Specifically, we examine the
design and evaluation activities that took place from 2006 to 2011 within the Text REtrieval Conference’s                51
(TREC) Legal Track, a computational research venue hosted by the National Institute of Standards and
Technologies. The Legal Track of TREC is notable in the history of AI research and practice because it relied
on a range of participatory approaches to facilitate the design and evaluation of new computational
techniques—in this case, for automating attorney document review for civil litigation matters. Drawing on
archival research and interviews with coordinators of the Legal Track of TREC, our analysis reveals how an
interactive simulation methodology allowed computer scientists and lawyers to become co-designers and
helped bridge the chasm between computational research and real-world, high-stakes litigation practice. In
analyzing this case from the recent past, our aim is to empirically ground contemporary critiques of AI
development and evaluation and the calls for greater participation as a means to address them.
CCS Concepts: • Human-centered computing • Collaborative and Social Computing • Studies in
Collaborative and Social Computing

Additional Key Words and Phrases: Artificial Intelligence; Co-Design; Expertise; Iterative Design; Legal
Technology; Participatory Design
ACM Reference format:
Fernando Delgado, Solon Barocas, & Karen Levy. 2022 An Uncommon Task: Participatory Design in Legal AI. In Proceedings
of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, 6, CSCW1, Article 51 (April 2022), 23 pages, https://doi.org/10.1145/3512898


1 INTRODUCTION
Contemporary critiques of artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML) systems
emphasize the need for social scientific expertise and greater participation of domain stakeholders
in AI system development [35, 47, 110, 139]. Expanding participation is often proposed as a
strategy for identifying and mitigating risks brought about by the integration of AI systems into
socially complex and high-stakes contexts. One rationale often articulated is that through
increased cross-disciplinary collaboration, as well as greater inclusion of the people who will be
interacting with the system, technologists will be able to better develop systems that are fit for
purpose and real-world use.
    Despite growing calls for participation in AI design, there are to date few empirical studies of
what these processes look like and how they are structured for meaningful engagement with
domain experts. In this paper, we examine a notable yet understudied AI design process in the
legal domain that took place over a decade ago, the impact of which still informs legal automation
efforts today. Specifically, we examine the design and evaluation activities that took place from




                PACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 6, No. CSCW1, Article 51, Publication date: April 2022.
51:2                                                   Fernando Delgado, Solon Barocas, & Karen Levy

2006 to 2011 within the Text REtrieval Conference’s (TREC) Legal Track, a computational research
venue hosted by the National Institute of Standards and Technologies (NIST) [82]. The Legal Track
of TREC is notable in the history of AI research and practice because it relied on a range of
participatory approaches to facilitate the design and evaluation of new computational
techniques—in this case, for automating attorney document review for civil litigation matters.
    The purpose of the Legal Track was to explore how computational techniques might help to
automate attorney document review as part of a broader civil discovery process through which
adversarial parties cooperate on exchanging relevant factual information with each other. The aim
of discovery is to equip both sides with a full view of the evidentiary basis of a case. As such,
discovery serves as the critical backdrop for all subsequent phases of litigation, and is the phase in
which outcomes of the majority of cases are determined [44]. The Legal Track created a unique
collaborative environment in which, through an iterative and interactive simulation, litigators
were provided visibility into the affordances and limitations of various data analytic approaches
while computer scientists were provided visibility into the principles and mechanics informing
civil discovery fact-finding—with both sides given the opportunity to develop a working
understanding of the other’s professional practices.
    Given the very limited history of participation in AI design and evaluation, what accounts for
this rare case of robust design collaboration? Drawing on archival research and interviews with
various participants in the Legal Track, this paper aims to explain why participatory approaches
took hold in this particular case of AI design and evaluation, how participation was
operationalized in practice, and the extent to which these methods helped lawyers and computer
scientists translate and resolve their respective concerns across disciplinary boundaries. In our
analysis we find that the evaluation goals and design methods of Legal Track were in large part
driven by domain practitioners rather than computer scientists, despite it being a computational
research venue. Further, we find that by structuring design and evaluation activities through the
format of an extended role-play simulation, Legal Track coordinators helped to neutralize the
knowledge asymmetries between computer scientists and non-technical stakeholders. We also
find that a key element of Legal Track’s success as a site of ML translation into practice was its
persistent embrace of real-world complexity and consistent rejection of task simplification in
order to produce something immediately tractable.
    This history is all the more remarkable since it was by no means a guaranteed outcome that AI
would receive anything more than a lukewarm response from legal professionals. Legal
practitioners have good reason to worry about failures in uncovering materials relevant to a case:
attorney document review and fact-finding play a critical, often decisive role in the resolution of
civil litigation matters [44]. The legal profession has also traditionally exhibited a reluctant stance
toward integrating new forms of expertise into its procedures and workflows [45, 62]. It is thus
particularly noteworthy that an AI-based approach for automating attorney review was able to
achieve legitimacy as early as it did among an influential set of judges and litigators [64, 91, 112].
This paper thus also reflects on why participatory methods seemed to work so well in this case
and what this experience might tell us more broadly about fostering effective participation in AI.
In analyzing this case from the recent past, our aim is to empirically ground contemporary AI
critique and analysis, especially with respect to calls for greater participation in AI design. Our
findings provide valuable insights into the role that participation might play more broadly in the
translation of AI research into practice, as well as the development of AI workflows that stand up
to legal and other forms of normative scrutiny.



PACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 6, No. CSCW1, Article 51, Publication date: April 2022.
An Uncommon Task: Participatory Design in Legal AI                                                       51:3

    We proceed as follows. In the next section, we provide an overview of the role discovery plays
in U.S. civil litigation and introduce Technology Assisted Review (TAR), an AI-driven approach to
classifying documents for review [51]. In Section 3, we review scholarship on legal automation,
participatory design, and participation in AI design, and situate our work in the CSCW and
broader literature. Section 4 details our research site, materials, and methodological
considerations. The next three sections of the paper report our findings, organized thematically.
Section 5 details the major historical events that lead to the establishment of the Legal Track, the
key figures who orchestrated that process, and the unique way that they decided to structure the
annual convening. Section 6 delves into the participatory nature of the interactive task in the Legal
Track, uncovering a range of mechanisms that facilitated effective participation by legal
professionals. Section 7 describes how key statistical concepts from computer science were
mapped onto values and outcomes underpinning civil discovery practice—and how efforts to
automate manual workflows drew new scrutiny to the effectiveness of manual practices. We show
how this helped set the stage for the broader litigation community of practice to develop a
working understanding of quantitative evaluation metrics in ML and their value in applying ML to
civil discovery practice. We turn in Section 8 to a broader discussion of the lessons that can be
drawn from this account, as well as certain limitations. Section 9 concludes.

2 BACKGROUND
2.1 Discovery in Civil Litigation
Civil discovery is a procedure whereby parties to a lawsuit are able to obtain evidence from
another party [69]. The goal of discovery is to help support specific party claims, defenses, and
assessments of damages in order to prepare for a trial, or to help litigants decide whether to settle
a case, based on the available evidence [124]. Discovery, in this light, can be conceptualized as a
truth-seeking procedure through which evidence is compelled into view and the claims of parties
are judged based on the available evidence. The process requires adversarial parties to cooperate
on exchanging relevant factual information with each other so that both sides can develop a full
view of the evidentiary basis of a case. In this vein, discovery’s value necessarily depends on how
comprehensively the process is conducted—without broad discovery, the ability to uncover the
facts required in making a careful and just assessment of the merits of the claims is constrained.
We might think of modern American discovery practice as a sort of “data-driven” mode of
adjudication.
    Discovery processes are particularly important—and particularly challenging—in the context of
complex litigation. Taking the largest securities fraud class action recovery in history as an
example, in 2002, the energy firm Enron was accused of defrauding shareholders through false
statements and deceptive accounting practices [61]. The plaintiffs’ claims were substantiated by
internal documentation and emails unearthed during the discovery phase of the litigation. Faced
with incontrovertible evidence of the scheme, Enron’s company directors, as well as co-defendant
banks, auditors, and law firms, contributed to an overall $7.2 billion settlement fund—the largest
securities class action recovery to date. As with any other discovery effort, central to the work of
discovery in this case was the identification of relevant documents in Enron’s vast internal
databases.
    The problem has only become more severe over time: when large corporations or government
actors are involved in civil litigation, and their petabytes of internal data are subject to discovery,
parties must shoulder a high cost in responding in a timely and accurate manner to the scores of


              PACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 6, No. CSCW1, Article 51, Publication date: April 2022.
51:4                                                   Fernando Delgado, Solon Barocas, & Karen Levy

requests that they may receive. These obligations have traditionally been discharged through
attorneys manually reviewing each document to assess its responsiveness, a laborious process that
requires significant investments of money and time. In its 2012 empirical survey and analysis of
discovery costs, the RAND Corporation’s Institution of Civil Justice urged the legal community to
“move beyond its current reliance on [manual] eyes-on review” in order to avoid an already labor-
intensive process from becoming intractable and risking the timely resolution of high-stakes
matters—in other words, to shift away from heavily manual attorney review flows by adopting
some form of automation [88].
2.2 Technology Assisted Review (TAR)
To address these challenges, civil litigants in the United States increasingly rely on TAR. The vast
majority of TAR implementations make use of a supervised ML framework [51]. In a supervised
ML framework, the algorithm learns how to distinguish between responsive and non-responsive
documents based on the presence or absence of combinations of features including words, phrases,
conceptual clusters, punctuation, and metadata.
    The transformation of litigation review from a painstaking manual process to a sophisticated
algorithm-driven methodology took place over a relatively short period of time. As we will discuss
below, TAR was introduced to a handful of litigators in an experimental research setting in 2008
[82], and was first deployed on a civil case only shortly thereafter, in 2012 [37]. By 2015, a vocal
and influential set of jurists was actively advocating for TAR’s use in cases involving significant
volumes of documents for attorney review [e.g., 97]. Since then, TAR has spread across the U.S.
civil court system, and its use is governed by a substantial set of procedural rules (including the
Federal Rules of Civil Procedure [23]) and case law derived from the scores of cases in which the
use of TAR has been adversarially negotiated. Moreover, legal professional associations such as
the American Bar Association [e.g., 12], the Sedona Conference [e.g., 109], and the Duke Bolch
Judicial Institute [e.g., 19] regularly publish primers and hold meetings regarding TAR. For any
lawyer working in civil litigation, it has now become a matter of core professional competence to
be versed in the affordances of TAR. They are expected to have sufficient knowledge to be able to
advise clients on whether and how to leverage TAR and subsequently defend these choices to
opposing parties and the presiding judge [23].

3 RELATED WORK
3.1 Legal Automation
The prospect of automating legal workflows has existed at least since Vannevar Bush’s 1945
description of the speculative memex device that would give way to “wholly new forms of
encyclopedias [...] with a mesh of associative trails,” and, for an attorney in particular, provide “at
his touch the associated opinions and decisions of his whole experience, and of the experience of
friends and authorities” [25]. This then-futuristic and optimistic account contrasts with much of
the contemporary scholarship on legal AI, including TAR. Much of the current work on legal AI
reflects legal practitioner-oriented concerns regarding negative impacts on attorneys, including:
the reduction of learning opportunities afforded to early career litigators as substantial swaths of
document review and analysis work become automated [65], the risk of undermining client
representation as new technical personnel—not subject to lawyers’ ethical obligations—weigh in
on legal decisions [42, 94], and more generally the loss of legal professional agency as more
litigation work becomes the purview of non-lawyers [58, 65, 89, 94, 95]. Additionally, legal
commentators have expressed concerns regarding the conflict between the due process norm of
PACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 6, No. CSCW1, Article 51, Publication date: April 2022.
An Uncommon Task: Participatory Design in Legal AI                                                       51:5

participation in the U.S. civil justice system and the costly expertise required to implement and
audit TAR successfully [42]. These concerns, based on reasonable perceived threats posed by the
introduction of algorithmic techniques into attorney workflows, echo critiques of decision
automation systems in administrative law [27, 30, 33, 34], as well as ongoing concerns related to
automated risk assessment tools used in the criminal justice system [3, 36].
    In the HCI and CSCW literature, legal automation is largely absent from the discussion. To our
knowledge, there are no works that specifically examine TAR despite the various interesting
challenges presented by introducing AI into an already complex professional workflow, as well as
TAR’s growing importance in the U.S. civil justice system. Expanding the review of existing HCI
and CSCW scholarship to include work on legal automation more broadly, two interesting early
CSCW pieces come into view [16, 123]. Both of these works focus on a much earlier wave of legal
discovery automation in which paper documents were being electronically scanned, stored, and
then bibliographically coded (as a pre-step for making them indexable and searchable for attorney
review). Unlike TAR, in which the considered judgment of trained lawyers is targeted for
automation, this early wave of discovery automation targeted work performed by litigation
support staff.
    A prescient aspect of these early CSCW works addressing legal automation was their
experimentation with participatory design (PD) techniques to better understand the discovery
domain. They made use of collaborative prototyping to make sense of a complex workflow in
which there were “overwhelming logistical requirements” and a “multiplicity of actors involved”
with various “unfolding interests” [16]. Their work foreshadows contemporary calls for
incremental design interventions [137] in how they refocus their efforts away from developing
new systems whole cloth and toward “embedding bits of automation” that would “relieve the
tedium” for the litigation support staff while ensuring their “interactive control over the process
necessary for interpretation and the exercise of judgment” [124].
3.2 Participatory Design
More broadly, PD in HCI and CSCW has historically aimed to push back on a perceived over-
reliance on abstraction and formalism in technology development. Early PD researchers and
practitioners were concerned that incumbent design methods modeled workplaces from a distance
with only idealized views of work practices, thus failing to capture important tacit understandings
and knowledge held by workers [125]. They sought to counteract this elision by leveraging
techniques like “cooperative prototyping” [18] that served to produce “co-constructed artifacts”
between designers and work practitioners [16, 124]. Through these collaborative design efforts, a
shared space could be created that serves as a region owned by neither technologist and designer—
or what Muller and Druin call a “third space” [81]—in which relationship building and mutual
learning could take place.
    PD also responds to concerns regarding the asymmetry of power and knowledge often found
in technology development in which computer scientists and designers hold relative advantage
over most other stakeholders. By using non-formal modes of communication such as mock-ups
and prototypes—rather than highly specialized technical language—asymmetries could be
neutralized, at least in theory [21, 22]. For PD adherents, designers risk falling into a participation
trap in which stakeholders are invited to the table yet not able to provide meaningful input if there
isn’t sufficient focus at first on establishing a shared language to collaborate with non-designers.
In other words, for PD, process is key in order to engender substantive change in how decisions
are made and who makes them in the design of technology; “you can’t just add users and stir”
[81].
              PACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 6, No. CSCW1, Article 51, Publication date: April 2022.
51:6                                                   Fernando Delgado, Solon Barocas, & Karen Levy

3.3 Participation in AI Design
A growing body of literature at the intersection of the AI, CSCW, and HCI research communities
is now critically examining how PD and related critical design methods can positively impact the
development of AI systems on the ground. For example, a number of workshops have been
convened to explore the role PD (or participation more broadly) can play in the design of AI
systems [73, 136, 139], and several articles have been published advocating for increased use of PD
methods in AI [13, 72]. These calls complement the design and policy recommendations
formulated by critical AI researchers concerned with the lack of multi-stakeholder involvement in
AI system design, development, and governance [35, 47, 110, 138]. They also echo earlier efforts by
HCI researchers who championed the use of PD methods for earlier rule-based AI systems [76,
115, 122].
    The current wave of PD research in AI includes the development of new systems for social
media content moderation [28, 53, 140], as well as decision-support tools in human services [24,
78] and hospital care [111]. Additionally, a growing set of HCI evaluation studies in domains
including child welfare [104], prostate cancer diagnosis [26], and diabetic retinopathy [14] have
been undertaken with domain experts to better understand the organizational contexts for AI use
in order to inform downstream PD interventions.
    A shared feature across these design efforts is their focus on modeling the human expertise and
labor central to the overall maintenance of these systems. This centering of workers and non-
technical professionals in technical system design can be traced back to early Scandinavian
collaborative design efforts for technologies whose introduction into corporate settings would
have an impact on working conditions and workers’ skill sets [119]. In a contemporary context
focused on algorithmic disruption of workflows, these researchers adopt a participatory process as
a way to prevent “de-professionalization” via automation and to explore how human discretion
can be designed into algorithmic decision-making workflows [78]. PD in a contemporary AI
context also serves to promote new organizational relationships and ways of communicating that
strengthen the internal capability to take ownership of algorithmic systems and repair them when
failures arise [111].
    Techniques from PD are also used by researchers to induce acceptance or bolster comfort in a
system that has already largely been designed. Some examples here include the growing interest
in Explainable AI (XAI) to solicit user input on and community approval of human interface
features for an already existing AI system [70, 79, 80]. In public service contexts, techniques
originating from PD practice have been leveraged “to raise comfort levels among affected
communities” in the development and deployment stages of AI systems [20], as well as for the
system roll-out and community outreach process [138].
    Drawing upon and extending this prior work, the current paper offers an empirical account of
the design process that helped to establish ML as a crucial component of litigation practice. In
doing so, this case study can serve as a useful exemplar to chart a path forward for AI design
methodology more broadly.

4 SITE & METHODS
4.1 TREC Legal Track
The Legal Track of TREC ran for six years between 2006 and 2011 [82]. The larger TREC
conference itself has a rich history, given its relation to the broader development of information
retrieval (IR) as a field, its historical connection to the Defense Advanced Research Projects

PACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 6, No. CSCW1, Article 51, Publication date: April 2022.
An Uncommon Task: Participatory Design in Legal AI                                                      51:7

Agency (DARPA), and the various fields it has served in fostering state-of-the-art (SOTA) text
processing and search technologies since 1992 [101, 134]. TREC is a modern example of a classic
IR-style evaluation framework—known as the Cranfield method—in which various researchers
across government, industry, and academia perform experiments on shared test collections to
compare effectiveness across different retrieval techniques [31, 32, 54, 55, 134].
    TREC can also be categorized as an example of a technical evaluation and benchmarking venue
making use of the Common Task Framework (CTF) in which a set of enrolled competitors test out
various methods on publicly available training datasets, while being evaluated by an impartial
scoring referee [71]. CTF has been recently historicized as the ‘secret sauce’ behind the many
advances we see today in ML. Its key ingredient is competition driven by leaderboard tracking,
resulting in an extreme focus on incremental gains in accuracy [17, 39]. Yet TREC differs
substantially in tone from what has been described as a ‘CTF Lifestyle’ in which teams participate
in a SOTA-chasing, winner-take-all competition, with cash prizes to boot [40].
    While quantified metrics are central to evaluation in TREC, TREC coordinators describe their
brand of common task exercises as rooted more broadly in “collections, comparisons, and
communities,” notably framing their event as a conference rather than as a competition [84]. How
TREC’s stated focus on communities was actually operationalized in the context of Legal Track is
of key interest for this study. While the initial rounds of Legal Track were aligned with the
traditional Cranfield method and CTF, the task design and evaluation approach adopted by Legal
Track coordinators evolved significantly after the first year—in large part to respond to the unique
complexity of the legal discovery community’s work. The bulk of these changes served to expand
Legal Track’s contribution beyond data set development and quantitative benchmarking to include
more participatory and qualitative forms of research and assessment.
4.2 Methodological Approach
We examine Legal Track’s participatory approach to stakeholder involvement as an important
historical precedent in AI design practice. We frame this research as an empirical case study [1, 92,
131] meant to shed light on the early design efforts supporting the integration of AI/ML
techniques into legal decision-making workflows. As such, Legal Track provides us with an
illustrative case study [118, 120] that can help us understand how participatory processes are best
suited to inform translation of AI research into real-world practice [67]. Further, this work is
inspired by a growing set of work in the CSCW and HCI literature regarding the need for a
greater focus on design history [38, 117, 118].
    The data used in our analysis consist of both archival reports and semi-structured interviews.
We retrieved primary source material from the official Legal Track documentation repository [82].
For each of the six years the conference ran, the full set of the following sets of documents were
qualitatively reviewed, coded, and analyzed [127]: instructions, guidelines, and FAQ
documentation (“Protocols”) drafted by coordinators and distributed to participating teams, final
reports (“Overviews”) published by coordinators, project post-mortem memos (“Lessons Learned”)
authored by domain experts, and research publications (“Proceedings Papers”) submitted by teams.
In total, we analyzed 76 official documents related to Legal Track. We supplemented this archival
analysis with 26 publications including research articles and legal commentary where Legal Track
was discussed in depth. In total, we included 102 documents in our analysis.
    In addition, to further contextualize our archival analysis, seven semi-structured interviews
were conducted, transcribed, coded, and analyzed over a two-month period (June to July 2021).
The interviewees included the majority of Legal Track coordinators across its multi-year run and
all Legal Track coordinators who served in that role across at least two iterations (and thus who
             PACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 6, No. CSCW1, Article 51, Publication date: April 2022.
51:8                                                   Fernando Delgado, Solon Barocas, & Karen Levy

had a role in not only coordinating the track within one year, but also a role in devising at least
one future round based on the previous years’ experience). All interviews were approximately one
hour in length, and began with basic questions regarding how interviewees were introduced to the
Legal Track, what role they had as coordinators, how they felt Legal Track was similar as well as
different from other TREC tracks they participated in, and how they would describe the
interaction between computer scientists and litigators on Legal Track across the years it ran.
    In tandem, the corpus of Legal Track primary source documents and the set of semi-structured
interviews with Legal Track coordinators provide us with a rich view into the task protocols,
rationales for design, results, analysis, concerns, and recommendations coming from the
participants involved in Legal Track.
4.3 Terminology
The actors involved in Legal Track never explicitly used terms such as “participatory design” or
“co-design.” We use these terms because they map to useful frameworks in the HCI and CSCW
literature regarding the type of cross-disciplinary and stakeholder interaction that is of core
interest to this study. The actors involved in Legal Track do not describe their work as “design” as
much as “evaluation”; and yet, while TREC is not traditionally considered an HCI or CSCW venue,
we interpret many of their research questions, protocol designs, and modes of reflective analysis
as centrally relevant to design questions concerning human-machine interaction and
collaboration.
    The actors involved also do not generally describe Legal Track activities under an “artificial
intelligence” rubric, but more specifically as an “information retrieval” effort (though they
published in AI journals and conferences, and retrospectively do frame TAR as an AI approach).
This in part follows from the fact that Legal Track (2006-2011) took place before an explosive
growth in AI research and commercialization brought about by advances in deep learning. The
supervised machine learning workflow that TAR is based on emerges from an IR/text analytics
tradition that considerably predates deep learning. Also worth noting along these lines is that
“machine learning” as it is referenced in the Legal Track archive is not treated as a separate field
or specialization (as often occurs today), but rather one of many computational techniques that IR
researchers and engineers may leverage.
    While for our purposes there is no ambiguity or controversy in designating TAR as an AI
technology, it is important to note these semantic shifts that have occurred between now and then
in order to carefully map between historical description and contemporary analysis. It is also
relevant to call out from a historical perspective how Legal Track uniquely straddles a period
before the ascendance of deep learning in which symbolic and statistical approaches to AI are in
conversation and competition with one another. Legal Track thus spans different waves of AI
research, consists of a broad range of design, evaluation, and translation activities, and sits at the
intersection of academic research, commercialization efforts, and government innovation policy.
    Within this trajectory, we fix our empirical focus specifically on how a supervised ML
approach to document categorization was developed and evaluated by a research community of
practice (i.e., IR researchers) and a legal community of practice (i.e., civil discovery practitioners),
informing the successful translation of ML research into real-world litigation. Importantly, we do
not intend this analysis as an appraisal of contemporary TAR practice. Digging into the current
state of TAR practice is a separate project requiring different data sets and sociolegal methods to
properly conduct (and one which will benefit from this foundational historical work). Our focus
here is on excavating TAR’s design history—not to uphold it uncritically as an exemplar for best


PACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 6, No. CSCW1, Article 51, Publication date: April 2022.
An Uncommon Task: Participatory Design in Legal AI                                                       51:9

practices in AI design, but to examine it as a previously undocumented precedent of AI design that
can provide us with interesting lessons for AI practice going forward.
4.4 Positionality: Actor as Analyst
The first author of this article was drawn to TAR as a research topic in reflecting on his previous
experience as a legal technologist at an electronic discovery firm. He began his industry career in
2005 and for over a decade played several roles including data scientist, team lead, engagement
manager, and organizational head. In becoming acquainted in more recent years with how AI/ML
was being integrated into other domains such as policing, criminal justice, and human resources,
he became curious about the unique role Legal Track had in the introduction of AI/ML expertise
into the civil litigation domain. The first author participated marginally in the efforts of the team
from his firm in the 2008 and 2009 rounds. He was therefore aware of the venue, yet played
neither a central role in a team nor any role on the Legal Track organizational committee across
Legal Track’s life span.

5 BIG TOBACCO ORIGINS
5.1 Deluge of White House Emails
We begin our account of the Legal Track with a Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations
Act (RICO) case filed by the Department of Justice during the Clinton Administration. United
States v. Philip Morris USA was one of the first cases in which it was broadly recognized that
traditional manual attorney review and keyword workflows were failing to provide efficient and
comprehensive discovery. By the time it ended in 2006, despite both sides incurring enormous
costs, neither side was able to assess whether it had delivered a truly comprehensive production in
response to discovery requests [74]. The U.S. government itself struggled to respond to Philip
Morris’s requests (delivered in a 1,726 paragraph document), later disclosing that it took 25
archivists and lawyers six months to review approximately 200,000 White House emails that had
been flagged by relevant keywords—leaving no time to do any due-diligence-oriented sampling or
searching of the remaining 19.8 million records that had not been flagged by rudimentary
keyword search [6, 7].
     Reflecting on the process, Jason Baron, the Director of Litigation at the National Archives and
Records Administration (NARA), was convinced that the era of “manual-review intensive”
discovery was over [4]. For Baron, and other litigators in similar positions across public interest
and corporate litigation, the exponential growth in electronically stored information across
corporations and government agencies had brought about an undeniable “stress point in
litigation” that risked indeterminately delaying the resolution of large matters, and which, for
cases small and large alike, was causing discovery costs to often exceed the amount in the
underlying dispute [90]. Baron voiced a broader consensus forming among litigators when he
pushed for examining a “family of computer technology employing new types of search methods
and techniques beyond the use of mere keywords” to help address the structural issues the
community was facing with the arrival of the data deluge [90].
5.2 Practitioner-Driven Prospecting
The failure of keywords to weed out a high number of false positives—that is, documents that
were erroneously flagged as responsive to discovery requests, when they were not in fact
relevant—was a central problem Baron noted early on [4]. Yet, an even deeper concern held by
Baron at that time was what he would later describe as the “dark matter” in discovery—those

              PACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 6, No. CSCW1, Article 51, Publication date: April 2022.
51:10                                                  Fernando Delgado, Solon Barocas, & Karen Levy

documents that were relevant, but were not captured by keywords and therefore not queued for
manual review [6]. Baron and other litigators were in search of, as he put it, a “better machine”
than keyword search to both better weed out false positives and also better address potential false
negatives. He also understood that the legal discovery community needed an empirical mechanism
to evaluate candidate approaches and benchmark their ability to help litigators honor their
discovery obligations [4].
    Concerned that manual review and keyword-based approaches were failing civil discovery,
Baron reached out to Ellen Voorhees, an expert on text analytics in charge of the TREC program,
to see if there was a way to structure an evaluation exercise around the needs of the legal
community [6]. In parallel, he approached Douglas Oard, a leading text analytics researcher and
colleague of Baron’s at the University of Maryland, as well as Richard Braman, the Executive
Director of the Sedona Conference, a nonprofit legal think tank dedicated to finding solutions to
complex litigation matters [96]. Baron and Oard drafted a proposal that would eventually be
approved by Voorhees and the other members of the TREC steering committee to establish the
Legal Track.
    Beyond the specific actors and institutions involved, what is notable here is how—rather than
the computer scientists actively prospecting civil discovery as a domain in need of computational
ordering [96, 114]—it was the non-technologist who was speculating, lobbying, and mobilizing for
technological interventions in the legal domain. While the computer scientists involved in TREC
were very responsive to and engaged with the problems civil discovery was facing once they were
brought into the picture, there is no indication that any of them assumed they were sure to have a
silver-bullet solution, nor does it appear they looked upon the legal domain opportunistically as a
site to further advance IR as an “engine of progress” or “universal(izing) science” [96, 114]. In fact,
the computer scientists specifically involved in the establishment and coordination of Legal Track
were very keen on squashing “audacious claims” made by marketers regarding IR tools, and took
care to correct and temper what they saw as legal experts’ imprecise understandings and overly
optimistic appraisal of advanced text analytic approaches, including topic modeling and other
non-Boolean techniques then informally lumped under the label of “concept search” [86].
5.3 Devising a Common Task for the Legal Domain
Once Legal Track was scheduled to kick off in 2006, the next step was to establish a shared dataset
to which all teams would have access. David Lewis, a veteran member of the TREC steering
committee, played a critical role in procuring and making available Legal Track’s first data set—
seven million documents produced for discovery in lawsuits filed by the Attorneys General of
several states against seven major tobacco organizations [8]. Using a publicly available data set
related to Big Tobacco litigation was only fitting given that it was a DOJ case against Phillip
Morris that initiated Baron’s search for better text retrieval and classification tools in the first
place. The “Master Settlement Agreement” (MSA) database, as it was referred to, consisted of a
wide array of document types including letters, memoranda, budgets, reports, minutes, transcripts,
agendas, scientific articles, and some email [8]. This heterogeneity was essential for evaluating
different computational approaches, as real-world litigation discovery often consists of diverse
document types. Later in 2009, to address the sparsity of email in the MSA database, Legal Track
coordinators added a second dataset from the In re Enron Corporation Securities Litigation class
action. This second dataset was comprised of approximately 850,000 documents, consisting of
email messages and attachments [57].
    In addition to shared data, coordinators needed to articulate realistic categorization tasks to
make for a meaningful and challenging evaluation exercise. To facilitate this, a group of lawyers
PACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 6, No. CSCW1, Article 51, Publication date: April 2022.
An Uncommon Task: Participatory Design in Legal AI                                                     51:11

associated with the Sedona Conference created five fictional complaints, covering claims involving
improper campaign contributions, deceptive advertising, insider trading, antitrust behavior, and
product liability [8]. These complaints were then further mapped to specific requests for document
production which became the basis for subject matter topics that teams would be tasked to
computationally model. For example, for the deceptive advertising complaint, teams were asked to
identify all documents related to Big Tobacco’s practice of placing tobacco products onto
television shows and movies, including the strategy, negotiation, and execution of these product
placements. To keep repeat teams on their toes, litigators developed new fictional complaints each
year expanding the range of claims to include medical malpractice, international trade violations,
patent infringement, and securities fraud [57, 87, 129]. As a further categorization task example,
for the fictional securities fraud complaint, teams were asked to identify all documents related to
energy contracts agreed to by the defendant including the estimates, forecasts, and analyses that
informed the negotiation and servicing of those contracts.

6 INTERACTIVE SIMULATION
6.1 Computer Scientists Wrestle with Relevance
Given the inherent ambiguity and variability of human language, identifying all—or even the
majority of—relevant documents in a large unstructured dataset is an extremely difficult challenge
[105]. In internet search—the most common object of IR study at this time—a user could often be
satisfied with a handful of relevant results. Discovery review, however, represented an example of
an exhaustive search exercise, in which a majority of all relevant items should be delivered [99]—a
new and unfamiliar challenge for most new Legal Track participants. Teams participating in Legal
Track were thus challenged to reconceptualize their working understanding of what adequate
performance looked like in an IR task setting.
     Further, the relevance criteria in discovery reviews were not of the same order as those that
would have been familiar to teams participating in other TREC tracks. As one team relayed, “the
information need is often so complex that it is hard to describe” in traditional query language [93].
Other teams struggled with the “fundamental vagueness” of document requests [43]. Indeed, in
order to be successful, Legal Track teams needed to move beyond thinking of Legal Track topics as
standalone specifications to be mapped directly to traditional IR queries, and instead to engage
with them as underspecified document requests to be interpreted within a broader context of
litigation strategy and legal procedure.
     In addition to vagueness, another challenge was that relevance shifted over time. The
traditional construction of relevance in IR was relatively static—but the type of relevance being
sought in more complex search contexts consisted of a more emergent target that matured based
on how a user “progresses through various stages of a task” and that was also sensitive to the
“cognitive state” of the user (i.e., the set of information to which they have access and how they
have synthesized that information) [92]. Applying this insight to a discovery context, participating
Legal Track teams had to reckon with the fact that what made a document relevant to a topic in
the eyes of an attorney could change over the duration of a review as new information was
introduced via the various ongoing and iterative parallel processes of document analysis, motion
practice, and legal strategizing [10, 11].
6.2 The Interactive Task
To begin addressing some of this complexity, coordinators of the 2007 Legal Track introduced an
“Interactive Challenge Task.” This was not TREC’s first task designated as “interactive,” but it did
             PACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 6, No. CSCW1, Article 51, Publication date: April 2022.
51:12                                                  Fernando Delgado, Solon Barocas, & Karen Levy

represent a new way of thinking about how to bring humans into the loop in IR research. While
much was learned through previous interactive tasks, no new model or methodology for IR
research or evaluation was synthesized from these efforts [34, 93], leaving Legal Track
coordinators to chart their own course for how to leverage human input in IR research and
evaluation.
    Legal Track’s Interactive Task aimed to “provide a more ‘end-to-end’ representation of the task
of e-discovery in the real world, incorporating aspects of the challenge of e-discovery” [10] and did
so in part by heavily recruiting input from legal community stakeholders to help with “objectively
modeling the e-discovery review process for the purpose of evaluating the efficacy of a wide range
of search methodologies” [96]. In other words, Legal Track’s conceptualization and
operationalization of interactivity relied heavily on multiple forms of community participation to
support the research and evaluation effort. To “members of the bench”—that is, judges—it was
presented in “Open Letters” and “Calls for Participation” jointly authored by The Sedona
Conference and NIST as an independent research venue in which “both long established and
emerging search methods for document review” were being evaluated and benchmarked [107,
108]. To industry stakeholders, the Interactive Task was presented as “an unprecedented
opportunity to be at the forefront of an important movement to evaluate document review
processes and create industry best practice standards” [96]. And perhaps most importantly, it was
presented to the legal profession as a whole as a venue which aimed to model “how real lawyers
would go about propounding discovery in civil litigation,” focusing on how to “model as
accurately as possible the real-world conditions in which companies and law firms, and the e-
discovery firms they engage, must meet their document-retrieval objectives and obligations” [10].
6.3 Litigation Role-Play
While experienced legal professionals played several key roles in Legal Track from the outset—not
only providing the original impetus for its development, but devising hypothetical complaints and
requests, serving as document assessors, and playing the role of expert searchers to help identify
algorithmic misses [8]—it wasn’t until 2008 that coordinators defined a special role of Topic
Authority (TA) for experienced litigators in the Interactive Task. Specifically, a TA was
responsible for serving “as an authoritative source of information for participating teams seeking
to develop definitions of relevance [and] serv[ing] as final arbiters of the samples reviewed to
measure participating teams’ effectiveness” [10]. For Legal Track coordinators, introducing a TA
into the mix who interfaced directly with teams throughout the development process was a
significant change to the task structure that more closely modeled how an “attorney employs the
products or services of an e-discovery firm [...] with the goal of efficiently applying that
conception of relevance across the full document population implicated by the matter” [10].
    This interorganizational framing of the Interactive Task simulation, and the TA role in
particular, was borne out of a critical insight gained by Legal Track coordinators in earlier rounds:
it was the senior litigator who, at the end of the day, was responsible for ensuring an accurate and
complete response to discovery requests and as such was the person whose conception of
relevance mattered the most [11]. As a complement to this, it was the job of a team participating
in Legal Track (as stand-in for an outsourced technology vendor) to “replicate, across the
document population, one conception of relevance—that of the legal architect who has hired”
them [10].
    Overall, the TA role was designed with three chief responsibilities in mind. First, the TA
provided topic clarification, “act[ing] as a resource to which teams can turn in order to clarify the
scope and intent of a target topic” [11]. Second, the TA provided authoritative guidance about
PACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 6, No. CSCW1, Article 51, Publication date: April 2022.
An Uncommon Task: Participatory Design in Legal AI                                                      51:13

document relevance to participants, based on the coordinators’ reasoning that “[i]n order to be
able to obtain valid measures of eﬀectiveness, it is essential that the samples reviewed for purposes
of evaluation be assessed in accordance with the TA’s conception of relevance” [11]. Finally, TAs
served as final adjudicators for the task.
    As such, TAs played more than merely a “human in the loop” supervisory role over the
algorithmic systems devised by teams. These domain experts didn’t merely train and evaluate the
automated systems being developed; rather, the process was structured to instantiate a norm for
having litigators train and evaluate the actual technologists developing the system.
6.4 Shifting Power and Knowledge Dynamics
Allowing the Legal Track TAs to not only help evaluate results at the end, but also opine on what
they observed regarding each team’s workflow, positioned Legal Track TAs as crucial experts.
TAs could prescribe a host of remedies to bolster the awareness of the computer scientists
participating in TREC regarding the interpretational complexity inherent to attorney review [15].
This positioning put domain experts on a more even playing field with the computer scientists
than they might have been in a more traditional technical R&D setting. And this, in turn, resulted
in interesting feedback dynamics emerging, including the TAs chiding teams for their “failure [...]
to develop a systematic and deliberate plan for defining relevance, as opposed to applying an ad
hoc approach” [15]. In addition to suggesting a need for tighter management in systems’
development, they also pointed to problems with Legal Track teams’ ability to undertake
requirements gathering: “Some teams did not appear to grasp how to formulate questions that
would have helped them to clarify the topic’s scope or to arrive at a common conception of
relevance” [15].
    TAs instructed teams to place greater emphasis on their requirements and design approaches,
including exploration of the “document collection early in the process,” generation of “nuanced
questions” connected to “exemplar documents” to be posed to the TAs and coordinators to inform
system design and classification targets, and the overall establishment of an “iterative process that
allowed for course correction” [15]. TAs also sometimes called out overly solutionist orientations
by some teams: Though TAs “expected the teams to simulate an actual service provider focused on
finding all of the documents the TA would need to identify to respond to the request for
production[, some teams] were focused on understanding how a single technique could contribute
to meeting e-discovery needs” [15].
    Despite these concerns, there was consensus across coordinators, TAs, and teams alike that the
more time teams spent with the TAs, the better [85]. Interaction with TAs was perceived by the
teams as key to understanding how to model relevance effectively and specifically helpful in
isolating which “document features such as document types and specific fields” could be best
utilized [135]. Teams particularly found orientation-style meetings held by TAs on topic scope
very helpful in correcting their “initial understanding of topic requests” and additionally
appreciated when document requests were further contextualized by broader discussion of the
mock complaint [93]. In contrast, some teams regretted not interacting more with TAs, and in
their reports indicated that their failure to actively engage with TAs contributed to their low recall
on the task [116, 126].

7 COUNTING ON MEASUREMENT
7.1 Mapping Numbers to Values


              PACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 6, No. CSCW1, Article 51, Publication date: April 2022.
51:14                                                  Fernando Delgado, Solon Barocas, & Karen Levy

As is standard practice in IR, recall for Legal Track was calculated by looking at the percent of
relevant documents identified by each team in relation to the total number of relevant documents
existing in the corpus. Precision, in turn, was calculated by looking at the percent of correctly
identified relevant documents in the result set from each team [49]. From the beginning, Legal
Track coordinators understood that, in terms of the precision/recall trade-off (since gaining
ground in one is in frequent tension with gaining or even maintaining ground in the other), recall
should always trump precision in a discovery context [8, 9]. Recall was considered crucial for civil
discovery review “since in real settings many requests for production state that ‘all’ such evidence
is to be produced” [87]. Precision was also deemed important in order “to reduce unnecessary
review costs” [87].
    The use of an F measure, integrating both precision and recall numbers, was adopted in Legal
Track “as a way of simultaneously reflecting the importance of recall (for exhaustiveness) and
precision (for timeliness and affordability)” [87]. Mapped as such, precision and recall paired
together were construed as proxies for tracking alignment between technological use and desired
normative outcomes. This mapping allowed stated trade-off rationales regarding system design
and performance to be interpretable across Legal Track coordinators and participants, computer
scientists, and litigators alike.
    The notion of recall played a critical role in contextualizing for Legal Track coordinators what
made discovery review so distinct from other contexts. Generally, for the Legal Track coordinators
who were IR researchers, it was a humbling experience to see many of the IR techniques leveraged
in other domains (such as internet search) not quickly rise to the challenge of addressing discovery
review needs [86]. They pointed to the “high recall task” nature of discovery review as the key
challenge that needed to be addressed, distinguishing it from internet search or recommender
tasks in which user satisfaction could often be achieved by finding and prioritizing just a few
relevant items (and thus where precision plays a significantly more important role than recall). In
civil discovery, the goal was to find all the relevant items as a class, and neither incumbent
methods of retrieval nor evaluation of that retrieval were fit to this purpose [86].
    In other TREC tracks, the evaluation process relies on relevance pooling: focusing formal
assessment on only those documents across the benchmarking corpus that at least one team has
identified as relevant [55, 98]. This pooling method allows assessment to focus on a constrained
set of documents, on the assumption that, taken together, teams will uncover the vast majority of
the relevant documents. Yet, for a high recall task, that assumption is rarely sound. It is very likely
that all participating teams will miss relevant documents that are for one reason or another hard
to computationally model. To address this gap, Legal Track coordinators specified a new protocol
to examine the documents that all teams had classified as irrelevant, in the event that all teams
were perhaps overlooking certain relevant documents. It would of course have been infeasible to
review the whole “discard pile,” so the Legal Track coordinators devised a sampling protocol to
review a targeted volume of documents from this set. Doing so allowed the coordinators to
develop more reliable estimates of recall.
    Legal Track coordinators, participating teams, and TAs were not the only stakeholders
tracking and debating metrics for automated approaches for attorney discovery review. By 2011,
judicial commentary on Legal Track was honing in specifically on TAR. Judge Andrew Peck of the
Southern District of New York stated that if the use of TAR “is challenged in a case before me, I
will want to know what was done and why that produced defensible results. I may be less
interested in the science behind the ‘black box’ of the vendor’s software than in whether it
produced responsive documents with reasonably high recall and high precision” [91]. What is

PACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 6, No. CSCW1, Article 51, Publication date: April 2022.
An Uncommon Task: Participatory Design in Legal AI                                                      51:15

especially worth noting here is not only the invocation of IR metrics in the judicial discourse on
technological acceptance, but also the central role Judge Peck ascribes to them in addressing
questions of procedural defensibility.
7.2 Debunking Human Review as the Gold Standard
In addition to interacting with the participating teams, the TA also had the responsibility of
performing quality control on the first-pass review of documents conducted by law students and
professional attorney document reviewers. The TA thus ensured that there was sufficient and
adequately labeled data for the purposes of task evaluation. This particular role unexpectedly
provided the TAs increased visibility into a more fundamental problem plaguing manual attorney
review: human inconsistency and error. In their role as adjudicator at the end of the 2009 round,
TAs reported being jolted by “flagrant errors” in the labeling of training and validation data
provided by the document reviewers during the adjudication phase of results. The TAs
subsequently commented on the need to reckon with the possibility “that human review may be
more flawed than the legal professional currently understands and acknowledges” [15]. This
stance echoed previous practitioner commentary regarding the “myth that manual review by
humans of large amounts of information is as accurate and complete as possible – perhaps even
perfect – and constitutes the gold standard by which all searches should be measured” [5].
    This finding was subsequently integrated into the motivations commonly offered for TAR in
the technical literature [50, 99], and triggered a broader reframing of the problem facing civil
discovery to one not just of document volume, but also a more fundamental issue with human
error in consistently applying interpretation guidelines in document review. With this
reformulation, the discussion of automating discovery began to parallel other debates about the
automation of white-collar work: the problem is not only information glut, but also faulty human
decision-making [29]. This line of thinking culminated in what would subsequently be referred to
in the TAR community as “the JOLT article” (referring to the Richmond Journal of Law and
Technology) [49]. In this article—whose first author was both a Legal Track TA and coordinator—
TAR (described as an “interplay of humans and computers”) is introduced for the first time to a
larger legal community. In the JOLT article, results from Legal Tracks 2008 and 2009 are presented
to argue that TAR could lead to results that are more effective—and not just more efficient—than
manual attorney review. This article became the established go-to reference when litigants
required scientific support for their use of TAR, and is still cited by judges and litigators in orders
and motions pertaining to TAR.

8 DISCUSSION
Legal Track enabled a deeply collaborative, participatory co-design process that pushed well
beyond mere consultation with domain experts. The reasons for this are numerous and each offers
more general lessons for the future of AI development and for making AI design more inclusive
and participatory.
   First, Legal Track’s structure as a role-play simulation—with an interactive and iterative
workflow—helped to neutralize the knowledge asymmetries between computer scientists and non-
technical stakeholders. Enabling litigators, as domain practitioners, to participate in (and help to
design) this simulation required significant scaffolding by Legal Track coordinators. This involved
multiple steps, including getting litigators involved with the task set-up and training, and giving
them a platform for evaluation in which they were given the opportunity to air extensive
feedback. Through their performance of the TA role, litigators occupied a unique perch from

              PACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 6, No. CSCW1, Article 51, Publication date: April 2022.
51:16                                                  Fernando Delgado, Solon Barocas, & Karen Levy

which they could learn about computational tools and practice, and from which they could
observe and analyze discovery review in a new light. In order to promote more collaboration and
knowledge-sharing across disciplinary boundaries, Legal Track coordinators intentionally honed
the roles of both litigators and teams through increasingly interactive task protocols. This process
was demystifying in at least two respects: it gave litigators insight into the capabilities of the
technology, and gave computer scientists insight into the complexities of the legal domain. This
bilateralism was crucial for ensuring that the design process was successful and genuinely
collaborative. As a more general lesson for AI design processes, Legal Track suggests the promise
of processes in which expertise flows in multiple directions, rather than being extractive or
hierarchical.
     Second, Legal Track seemed to be successful because it embraced the complexity of the real-
world task AI was being leveraged to address. Computer scientists involved in Legal Track did not
respond to the many obstacles they encountered in applying their toolset to civil discovery by
simplifying the problem formulation or reducing the scope of analysis to something immediately
tractable. Rather, year after year, coordinators created or updated their datasets, commissioned
hypothetical complaints and documents requests, and devised new administrative and evaluation
protocols, all to better approximate the complexity of the real world and to reflect the lessons
learned from previous iterations. Their aim was to develop systems that could actually address the
scalability issues civil discovery was confronting in the face of exponential growth in digital data.
The computer scientists coordinating Legal Track were even skeptical from the outset about how
useful advanced analytics would be for discovery review. And when teams seemed more
interested in testing out their particular tool than addressing the automation challenges of
discovery review, Legal Track gave space for this type of solutionism to be critiqued as misaligned
with the goals of the evaluation exercise.
     Third, it is noteworthy that the idea for a Legal Track was actually devised by a representative
of the legal domain and was not the brainchild of a computer scientist prospecting a new domain
in which to apply their methods [cf. 96, 114]. This helps to explain why the litigators involved in
Legal Track had such central roles in structuring classification tasks, evaluating teams’ methods
and outputs, and educating technologists on the complexity of their practice domain. While this
unique participatory approach to AI design emerged in part as a response to the complexity of
civil discovery review, it was also partially enabled by the fact that the computer scientists and
litigators interacting with each other were often of equal professional status, coming from fields of
similarly high prestige. It is perhaps this unique pairing of litigators soliciting computer scientists,
and computer scientists consistently deferring to legal professional expertise, that helped to create
a dynamic in which the substantive concerns arising from the legal domain held in balance the
technical goals of computer science.
     In assessing how to best generalize from Legal Track as an AI design precedent, we should
note that Legal Track entailed a great deal of time and resources across a significant number of
organizations over several years. This would be the case for other common task exercises, yet one
leveraging the type of iterative and participatory techniques that the Interactive Task did
necessarily requires an exceptional level of commitment and attention. Without proper incentives
and resources to sustain this level of participation across the various actors involved, this type of
design approach will be out of reach to most communities. Indeed, it is worth noting which
stakeholders did not take part in the Legal Track. In addition to having document review lawyers
and experienced litigators perform key roles in the overall evaluation process, a more dedicated
focus on public interest concerns could have helped identify a broader set of actors from civil

PACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 6, No. CSCW1, Article 51, Publication date: April 2022.
An Uncommon Task: Participatory Design in Legal AI                                                     51:17

society who also hold a critical stake in civil litigation as potential plaintiffs or defendants. A
primary question to address in thinking about applying participatory simulations to other contexts
is thus how to provide the necessary support to allow a wider range of stakeholders to participate
in the process. It also highlights the challenge of incentivizing researchers to commit to a multi-
year research effort—and particularly one in which the design and evaluation techniques primarily
evolve to address domain-specific problems, rather than necessarily hewing to broader trends in
academic research and publishing in their home disciplines.
    In addition to these questions of resources and incentives, another key aspect to address in
thinking through the applicability of participatory simulations is the extent to which the
application domain benefits from pre-existing rules of conduct and standards of care. The
computer scientists involved in Legal Track did not need to come up with new rules for what it
meant to properly conduct document review. The techniques for automation that they proposed
were evaluated based on already established and codified rules of professional duty and care, as
well as rules for evidence and ascertaining relevance. Further, the computer scientists’ statistical
approaches for evaluating accuracy were analyzed and mapped by legal stakeholders to their own
procedural ways of thinking through pragmatic trade-offs when faced with the challenge of
ensuring both comprehensive discovery and speedy justice. Without established institutional rules
or norms to help clarify what sorts of AI-enabled results could be considered successful, it is less
clear that a meaningful simulation could be designed or conducted, or how its results could be
interpreted in a way that carried weight across a broader field of practice.
    Taking these caveats into consideration, we can still view Legal Track as a useful example of
how computer scientists can engage with domains in ways that are more bilateral and less
extractive or transactional. It also showcases how participatory technology development can move
forward without relying on increasing abstraction and reduction at each step. And it offers a rich
view into how wrestling with the complexity of a domain can productively unsettle computational
practice.

9 CONCLUSION
Through Legal Track, experienced litigators were provided a central role that enabled them to
learn about the affordances and limitations of various data analytic approaches from leading
computer scientists; conversely, computer scientists learned about the principles and mechanics
informing legal fact-finding and attorney review from experienced litigators. In large part thanks
to this structured collaboration, ML-driven methods tailored to the requirements of litigation
practice were developed to meet the needs of the community. This process fostered a cohort of
cross-disciplinary experts who learned how to effectively translate and design across
computational and legal disciplinary boundaries, and who were instrumental to the early and
principled integration of AI into U.S. civil litigation practice.
    Our findings are especially relevant to contemporary calls for greater participation in AI design
as a mechanism for integrating the concerns of a wider range of stakeholders, fostering greater
accountability, and limiting downstream harms. Our findings demonstrate possibilities for
thinking about participation from a relationship-building standpoint in which domain
stakeholders play active and ongoing roles in driving problem formulation and determining
evaluation criteria. The experience of the Legal Track of TREC highlights how such an approach
helped bridge the chasm between AI academic research and real-world, high-stakes practice, and
how PD processes—when structured to engender deep engagement from domain experts—may
help to provide a basis for designing tools that meaningfully address community needs.

             PACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 6, No. CSCW1, Article 51, Publication date: April 2022.
51:18                                                       Fernando Delgado, Solon Barocas, & Karen Levy

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the Russell Sage Foundation (Grant # 1908-17713) and the John D.
and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors alone
and should not be construed as representing the opinions of the Foundations.

REFERENCES
[1]  Andrew Abbott. 1992. “What do cases do? Some notes on activity in sociological analysis.” In What is a case?, edited
     by Charles Ragin and H.S. Becker. New York: Cambridge University Press.
[2]  Philip E. Agre. 1997. Toward a Critical Technical Practice: Lessons Learned in Trying to Reform AI. In Bridging the
     Great Divide: Social Science, Technical Systems, and Cooperative Work, edited by Geof Bowker, Les Gasser, Leigh Star,
     and Bill Turner. Erlbaum.
[3]  Julia Angwin, Jeff Larson, Surya Mattu, and Laura Kirchner. 2016. Machine Bias. ProPublica.
     https://www.propublica.org/article/machine-bias-risk-assessments-in-criminal sentencing.
[4]  Jason R. Baron. 2005. Toward a Federal Benchmarking Standard for Evaluating Information Retrieval Products Used
     In E-Discovery. The Sedona Conference Journal 6(1).
[5]  Jason R. Baron (Ed.). 2007. The Sedona Conference Best Practices Commentary on the Use of Search and Information
     Retrieval Methods in E-Discovery. The Sedona Conference Journal 8(2).
[6]  Jason R. Baron. 2007. The TREC Legal Track: Origins and Reflections on the First Year. The Sedona Conference Journal
     8(1).
[7]  Jason R. Baron. 2016. Legal Track. Presentation. Text REtrieval Conference 25th Anniversary.
[8]  Jason R. Baron, David D. Lewis, and Douglas W. Oard. 2006. TREC Legal Track 2006 Overview. In Proceedings of the
     Fifteenth Text REtrieval Conference.
[9]  Jason R. Baron (Ed.). 2007. The Sedona Conference Best Practices Commentary on the Use of Search and Information
     Retrieval Methods in E-Discovery. The Sedona Conference Journal 8(2).
[10] Jason R. Baron, Bruce Hedin, Douglas W. Oard, and Stephen Tomlinson. 2008. TREC Legal Track 2008 Interactive
     Guidelines. http://trec-legal.umiacs.umd.edu/guidelines/2008InteractiveGuidelines.pdf
[11] Jason R. Baron, Bruce Hedin, Douglas W. Oard, and Stephen Tomlinson. 2009. TREC Legal Track 2009 Interactive
     Guidelines. http://trec-legal.umiacs.umd.edu/LT09_ITG_final.pdf
[12] Baron, Jason R., Ralph C. Losey, and Michael D. Berman. Perspectives on Predictive Coding: and Other Advanced
     Search Methods for the Legal Practitioner. Chicago, Illinois: American Bar Association, Section of Litigation, 2016.
[13] Eric PS Baumer. 2017. Toward human-centered algorithm design. Big Data & Society 4, 2.
[14] Emma Beede, Elizabeth Baylor, Fred Hersch, Anna Iurchenko, Lauren Wilcox, Paisan Ruamviboonsuk, and Laura M.
     Vardoulakis. 2020. A Human-Centered Evaluation of a Deep Learning System Deployed in Clinics for the Detection
     of Diabetic Retinopathy. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems.
     Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–12.
[15] Art Bieser, Christopher H. Boehning, Michael Roman Gaske, Howard J. C. Nicols, David Stanton, and K. Krasnow
     Waterman. 2009. Reflections of the Topic Authorities: About the 2009 TREC Legal Track Interactive Task. https://trec-
     legal.umiacs.umd.edu/other/2009TaReflections.pdf
[16] Jeanette Blomberg, Lucy Suchman, and Randall Trigg. 1996. Reflections on a Work-Oriented Design Project. Human-
     Computer Interaction 11.
[17] Avrim Blum and Mortiz Hardt. 2015. The Ladder: A Reliable Leaderboard for Machine Learning Competitions. In
     Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning. Lille, France.
[18] S. Bødker and K. Grønbaek. 1991. Cooperative prototyping: Users and designers in mutual activity. International
     Journal of Man-Machine Studies 34:453-478.
[19] Bolch Judicial Institute, Guidelines and Best Practices for Implementing the 2015 Discovery Amendments Concerning
     Proportionality (Third Edition) (2021).
[20] Dan Brassil, Christopher Hogan, Simon Attfield. 2009. The Centrality of User Modeling to High Recall with High
     Precision Search. In Proceedings of the 2009 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics.
[21] Tone Bratteteig and Ina Wagner. 2012. Disentangling power and decision-making in participatory design. In
     Proceedings of the 12th Participatory Design Conference: Research Papers - Volume 1 (PDC '12). Association for
     Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 41–50.
[22] Tone Bratteteig and Ina Wagner. 2016. Unpacking the notion of participation in participatory design. Computer
     Supported Cooperative Work 25, 6 (Dec. 2016), 425–475.
[23] Julia L. Brickell & Peter J. Pizzi, To-wards a Synthesis of Judicial Perspectives on Technology-Assisted Review, 82
     DEF. COUNS. J.309, 313–19 (2015).



PACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 6, No. CSCW1, Article 51, Publication date: April 2022.
An Uncommon Task: Participatory Design in Legal AI                                                                 51:19

[24]   Anna Brown, Alexandra Chouldechova, Emily Putnam-Hornstein, Andrew Tobin, and Rhema Vaithianathan. 2019.
       Toward Algorithmic Accountability in Public Services: A Qualitative Study of Affected Community Perspectives on
       Algorithmic Decision-making in Child Welfare Services. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors
       in Computing Systems. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Paper 41, 1–12.
[25]   Vannevar Bush. (July 1945). As We May Think. The Atlantic Monthly. 176 (1): 101–108.
[26]   Carrie J. Cai, Samantha Winter, David Steiner, Lauren Wilcox, and Michael Terry. 2019. "Hello AI": Uncovering the
       Onboarding Needs of Medical Practitioners for Human-AI Collaborative Decision-Making. In Proceedings of ACM
       Human Computer Interaction 3, CSCW, Article 104.
[27]   Calo, Ryan, and Danielle Keats Citron. "The Automated Administrative State: A Crisis of Legitimacy." Emory Law
       Journal 70, no. 4 (2021): 797.
[28]   E. Chandrasekharan, C. Gandhi, M. W. Mustelier, and E. Gilbert. 2019. CrossMod: A cross-community learning-based
       system to assist reddit moderators. In Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, 3, CSCW.
[29]   Angèle Christin. 2017. Algorithms in Practice: Comparing Web Journalism and Criminal Justice. Big Data & Society
       (December).
[30]   Danielle K. Citron. 2008. Technological Due Process. Washington University Law Review Vol 85 1249-1313.
[31]   C. W. Cleverdon. 1967. The Cranfield tests on index language devices. In Aslib Proceedings, Vol 19 173–192, 1967.
[32]   C. W. Cleverdon. 1991. The significance of the Cranfield tests on index languages. In Proceedings of the Fourteenth
       Annual International ACM/SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval, 3–12.
[33]   Cobbe, Jennifer. "Administrative law and the machines of government: judicial review of automated public-sector
       decision-making." Legal Studies 39, no. 4 (2019): 636-655.
[34]   Cary Coglianese and David Lehr. "Regulating by Robot: Administrative Decision Making in the Machine-Learning
       Era." Georgetown Law Journal 105 (2017): 17-8.
[35]   Kate Crawford and Ryan Calo (2016). There is a Blind Spot in AI Research. Nature 538 (7625): 311-313.
[36]   Kade Crockford. 2018. Risk assessment tools in the criminal justice system: inaccurate, unfair, and unjust? ACLU of
       Massachusetts. https://privacysos.org/blog/risk-assessment-tools-criminal justice-system-inaccurate-unfair-unjust.
[37]   Da Silva Moore v. Publicis Groupe & MSL Groupe, 287 F.R.D. 181 (S.D.N.Y. 2012)
[38]   Carl DiSalvo. 2014. The need for design history in HCI. Interactions 21(6), pp.20-21.
[39]   David Donoho. 2017. 50 Years of Data Science. Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics, 26:4, 745-766.
[40]   David Donoho and H. Monajemi. 2018. Stats 385 Stanford Lecture 01: The Revolution is here!
       https://stats285.github.io/2018/assets/lectures18/Lecture-01-20180925.pdf
[41]   Susan Dumais and N. Belkin. 2005. The TREC interactive tracks: putting the user into search. In Ellen M. Voorhees
       and Donna K. Harman, editors, TREC: Experiment and Evaluation in Information Retrieval, p. 123–52.
[42]   Seth Katsuya Endo. 2018. Technological Opacity & Procedural Injustice. 59 British Columbia Law Review 821-876.
[43]   Efthimis N. Efthimiadis and Mary A. Hotchkiss, 2007. University of Washington (UW) at Legal TREC Interactive
       2007. In Proceedings of the Sixteenth Text REtrieval Conference.
[44]   David Freeman Engstrom and Jonah B. Gelbach. 2020. Legal Tech, Civil Procedure, and the Future of Adversarialism.
       169 University of Pennsylvania Law Review.
[45]   Patrick Flanagan and Michelle H. Dewey. 2019. Where Do We Go from Here? Transformation and Acceleration of
       Legal Analytics in Practice 35 Georgia State Law Review.
[46]   Diana E. Forsythe. 1993. Engineering Knowledge: The Construction of Knowledge in Artificial Intelligence. Social
       Studies of Science 23(3).
[47]   Ben Green and Salomé Viljoen. 2020. Algorithmic realism: expanding the boundaries of algorithmic thought. In
       Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (FAT* ’20). Association for
       Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 19–31
[48]   Maura R. Grossman, Conor R. Crowley, and Joe Looby. 2008. Reflections of the Topic Authorities. https://trec-
       legal.umiacs.umd.edu/other/Tareflections2008.doc
[49]   Maura R. Grossman and Gordon V. Cormack. 2011. Technology-Assisted Review in E-Discovery Can be More
       Effective and More Efficient Than Exhaustive Manual Review. Richmond Journal of Law and Technology 17(3).
[50]   Maura R. Grossman and Gordon V. Cormack. 2011. Inconsistent Assessment of Responsiveness in E-Discovery:
       Difference of Opinion or Human Error? ICAIL 2011 Workshop on Setting Standards for Searching Electronically Stored
       Information in Discovery Proceedings (DESI IV Workshop).
[51]   Maura R. Grossman and Gordon V. Cormack. 2013. “The Grossman-Cormack Glossary of Technology-Assisted
       Review.” Federal Courts Law Review 1, 32.
[52]   Maura R. Grossman and Gordon V. Cormack. 2019. Quantifying Success: Using Data Science to Measure the
       Accuracy of Technology-Assisted Review in Electronic Discovery IN Walters, E. (Ed.). (2019). Data-driven law: data
       analytics and the new legal services. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
[53]   Aaron Halfaker and R. S. Geiger. 2020. Ores: Lowering barriers with participatory machine learning in wikipedia. In
       Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, 4 CSCW, 1-37.


                 PACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 6, No. CSCW1, Article 51, Publication date: April 2022.
51:20                                                          Fernando Delgado, Solon Barocas, & Karen Levy

[54]    M.M. Hall and and E. Toms. 2021. Building a Common Framework for IIR Evaluation. Vol. 8138 LNCS. Lecture Notes
        in Computer Science. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-40802-1_3.
[55]    Donna K. Harman. 2005. The TREC Test Collections. In Ellen M. Voorhees and Donna K. Harman, editors, TREC:
        Experiment and Evaluation in Information Retrieval, pages 21–52.
[56]    C. N. Harrington & A. M. Piper. 2019. Deconstructing Community-Based Collaborative Design: Towards More
        Equitable Participatory Design Engagements. PACM HCI, 3(November).
[57]    Bruce Hedin, Stephen Tomlinson, Jason R. Baron, and Douglas Oard. 2009. TREC Legal Track 2009 Overview. In
        Proceedings of the Eighteenth Text REtrieval Conference.
[58]    Mireille Hildebrandt. 2018. Law as computation in the era of artificial legal intelligence: Speaking law to the power of
        statistics. University of Toronto Law Journal 68(1): 12-35.
[59]    Chris Hogan, Robert Bauer, Dan Brassil. 2010. Automation of legal sensemaking in e-discovery. Artificial Intelligence
        and Law 18: 431-457.
[60]    International Association of Public Participation [IAP2]. (n.d.). IAP2 Spectrum of Public Participation.
        https://cdn.ymaws.com/www.iap2.org/resource/resmgr/pillars/Spectrum_8.5x11_Print.pdf
[61]    In re: Enron Corporation Securities Litigation
[62]    Sheila Jasanoff. 1995. Science at the Bar: Law, Science and Technology in America. Harvard University Press:
        Cambridge: Massachusetts.
[63]    Michael Katell, Meg Young, Dharma Dailey, Bernease Herman, Vivian Guetler, Aaron Tam, Corinne Binz, Daniella
        Raz, and P. M. Krafft. 2020. Toward Situated Interventions for Algorithmic Equity: Lessons from the Field. In
        Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (FAT* ’20), January 27–30, 2020, Barcelona, Spain.
[64]    Daniel M. Katz, Quantitative Legal Prediction--or--How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Start Preparing for the Data-
        Driven Future of the Legal Services Industry, 62 Emory L. J. 823 (2013).
[65]    Daniel N. Kluttz and Deirdre K. Mulligan. 2019. Automated Decision Support Technologies and the Legal Profession.
        34 Berkeley Technology Law Journal 853.
[66]    P. M. Krafft, Meg Young, Michael Katell, Jennifer E. Lee, Shankar Narayan, Micah Epstein, Dharma Dailey, Bernease
        Herman, Aaron Tam, Vivian Guetler, Corinne Bintz, Daniella Raz, Pa Ousman Jobe, Franziska Putz, Brian Robick,
        and Bissan Barghouti. 2021. An Action-Oriented AI Policy Toolkit for Technology Audits by Community Advocates
        and Activists. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (FAccT '21).
        Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 772–781.
[67]    Min Kyung Lee, Daniel Kusbit, Anson Kahng, Ji Tae Kim, Xinran Yuan, Allissa Chan, Daniel See, Ritesh Noothigattu,
        Siheon Lee, Alexandros Psomas, et al. 2019. WeBuildAI: Participatory framework for algorithmic governance. In
        Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 3, CSCW (2019), 1–35.
[68]    Jonathan Lazar, Jinjuan Heidi Feng, Harry Hochheiser. 2017. “Case Studies.” In Research Methods in Human
        Computer Interaction (2nd Edition), edited by Jonathon Lazar, Jinjuan Heidi Feng, Harry Hocheiser, 153-185. Morgan
        Kaufmann.
[69]    Legal Information Institute, Cornell University. Rule 26. Duty to Disclose; General Provisions Governing Discovery.
        https://www.law.cornell.edu/rules/frcp/rule_26.
[70]    Q. V. Liao, D. Gruen, and S. Miller (2020). Questioning the AI: Informing Design Practices for Explainable AI User
        Experiences. Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - Proceedings, 1–15;
[71]    Mark       Liberman.      2015.    Reproducible Research and the Common Task Method.                          April   1.
        https://www.simonsfoundation.org/event/reproducible-research-and-the-common-task-method/
[72]    Daria Loi, Thomas Lodato, Christine T. Wolf, Raphael Arar, and Jeanette Blomberg. 2018. PD manifesto for AI
        futures. In Proceedings of the 15th Participatory Design Conference: Short Papers, Situated Actions, Workshops and
        Tutorial - Volume 2 (PDC '18). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 48, 1–4.
[73]    Daria Loi, Christine T. Wolf, Jeanette L. Blomberg, Raphael Arar, and Margot Brereton. 2019. Co-designing AI
        Futures: Integrating AI Ethics, Social Computing, and Design. In Companion Publication of the 2019 on Designing
        Interactive Systems Conference (DIS '19 Companion). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
        381–384.
[74]    Joseph Looby. 2014. The Decade of Discovery. 10th Mountain Films.
[75]    Kristian Lum and William Isaac. 2016. To Predict and Serve? The Royal Statistical Society.
        https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1740-9713.2016.00960.x.
[76]    Teresa Lynch and Shirley Gregor. 2004. User participation in decision support systems development: influencing
        system outcomes. European Journal of Information Systems 13, 4 (2004), 286–30.
[77]    Elizabeth Y. McCuskey. 2016. Submerged Precedent. Nevada Law Journal 16: 515, 530-531
[78]    Naja Holten Møller, Irina Shklovski, and Thomas T. Hildebrandt. 2020. Shifting Concepts of Value: Designing
        Algorithmic Decision-Support Systems for Public Services. In Proceedings of the 11th Nordic Conference on Human-
        Computer Interaction: Shaping Experiences, Shaping Society (NordiCHI ’20), October 25–29, 2020, Tallinn, Estonia.
        ACM, New York, NY, USA, 12 pages.

PACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 6, No. CSCW1, Article 51, Publication date: April 2022.
An Uncommon Task: Participatory Design in Legal AI                                                                    51:21

[79]  H. Mucha, D. Mevißen, S. Robert, R. Jacobi, K. Meyer, W. Heusler, and D. Arztmann. 2020. Co-design futures for AI
      and space: A workbook sprint. Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - Proceedings.
[80] H. Mucha and S. Robert. (2020). Emerging Perspectives on Medical Decision Support : Co-Designing XAI; Henrik
      Mucha, Sebastian Robert et al. Towards Participatory Design Spaces for Explainable AI Interfaces in Expert Domains.
      CEUR Workshop Proceedings http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-2796/xi-ml-2020_mucha.pdf.
[81] Michael Muller and A. Druin. (2012). Participatory design: The third space in human-computer interaction. In The
      Human-Computer Interaction Handbook: Fundamentals, Evolving Technologies, and Emerging Applications. 1125-1154.
[82] National Institute of Standards and Technologies (NIST). Text REtrieval Conference, Legal Track.
      https://trec.nist.gov/data/legal.html.
[83] National Institute of Standards and Technologies (NIST). TREC 2007 Legal Track: Interactive Challenge Task.
      https://trec-legal.umiacs.umd.edu/guidelines/interactivetask.html.
[84] Douglas W. Oard, The Future of Information Retrieval Evaluation. 2020. In Evaluating Information Retrieval and
      Access Tasks: NTCIR's Legacy of Research Impact. Springer.
[85] Douglas W. Oard, Jason R. Baron, and David D. Lewis. 2010. Some Lessons Learned to Date from the TREC Legal Track
      (2006-2009). https://trec-legal.umiacs.umd.edu/other/LessonsLearned.pdf
[86] Douglas W. Oard, Jason R. Baron, Bruce Hedin, David D. Lewis, and Stephen Tomlinson. 2010. Evaluation of
      Information Retrieval for E-discovery. Artificial Intelligence and Law 18, 4 (December 2010), 347–386. DOI:
      https://doi.org/10.1007/s10506-010-9093-9.
[87] Douglas W. Oard, Bruce Hedin, Stephen Tomlinson, Jason R. Baron, 2008. TREC Legal Track 2008 Overview. In
      Proceedings of the Seventeenth Text REtrieval Conference.
[88] Nicholas M. Pace and Laura Zakaras. 2012. Where the Money Goes: Understanding Litigant Expenditures for Producing
      Electronic Discovery. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation
[89] Frank A. Pasquale. 2018. A Rule of Persons, Not Machines: The Limits of Legal Automation. 87 George Washington
      Law Review 1.
[90] George L. Paul and Jason R. Baron. 2007. Information Inflation: Can the Legal System Adapt? 13 Richmond Journal of
      Law and Technology.
[91] Andrew Peck. 2011. Search, Forward. Legal Tech News (October).
[92] Charles Ragin. 1992. “Introduction: Cases of ‘What is a case?’.” In What is a case?, edited by C. Ragin and H.S. Becker.
      New York: Cambridge University Press.
[93] Venkat Rangan and Maojin Jiang. 2009. Clearwell Systems at TREC 2009 Legal Interactive. In Proceedings of the
      Eighteenth Text REtrieval Conference.
[94] Dana A. Remus. 2014. The Uncertain Promise of Predictive Coding. 99 Iowa Law Review 1691, 1692.
[95] Dana A. Remus and Frank Levy. 2017. Can Robots Be Lawyers? Computers, Lawyers, and the Practice of Law. 30
      Georgetown Journal of Legal Ethics.
[96] David Ribes, Andrew S Hoffman, Steven C Slota, and Geoffrey C Bowker. 2019. The Logic of Domains. Social Studies
      of Science 49, no. 3.
[97] Rio Tinto PLC v. Vale S.A., 306 F.R.D. 125 (S.D.N.Y. 2015)
[98] S. Robertson, 2008. On the History of Evaluation in IR. Journal of Information Science 34(4):439-456.
[99] Herbert L. Roitblat, Anne Kershaw, and Patrick Oot. 2010. Document Categorization in Legal Electronic Discovery:
      Computer Classification vs. Manual Review. 61 American Society for Information Science and Technology 70.
[100] L. Rosenfeld and P. Morville. 2002. Information architecture for the World Wide Web, 2nd edn. O’Reilly Media,
      Sebastopol.
[101] Brent R. Rowe, Dallas W. Wod, Albert N. Link, and Diglio A. Simoni. 2010. Economic Impact Assessment of NIST’S
      Text REtrieval Conference (TREC) Program. https://trec.nist.gov/pubs/2010.economic.impact.pdf.
[102] Tefko Saracevic. 2007. Relevance: A Review of the Literature and a Framework for Thinking on the Notion in
      Information Science. Part III: Behavior and Effects of Relevance. Journal of the American Society for Information
      Science and Technology 58(13): 2126-2144.
[103] Tefko Saracevic. 2016. The Notion of Relevance in Information Science: Everybody knows what relevance is. But,
      what is it really?. Synthesis Lectures on Information Concepts, Retrieval, and Services. 8. i-109.
      10.2200/S00723ED1V01Y201607ICR050.
[104] D. Saxena and S. Guha. 2020. Conducting participatory design to improve algorithms in public services: Lessons and
      challenges. In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work, CSCW, 383–388.
[105] Erich Schweighofer. The Revolution in Legal Information Retrieval or: The Empire Strikes Back. Journal of
      Information, Law and Technology (JILT) 1999 (1).
[106] The Sedona Conference. https://thesedonaconference.org.
[107] The Sedona Conference. 2008. Call for Volunteers to be Part of TREC Legal Track 2008.
[108] The Sedona Conference. 2009. An Open Letter to Law Firms and Companies in the Legal Tech Sector.
[109] The Sedona Conference. 2017b. TAR Case Law Primer. https://thesedonaconference.org/node/279.


                 PACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 6, No. CSCW1, Article 51, Publication date: April 2022.
51:22                                                        Fernando Delgado, Solon Barocas, & Karen Levy

[110] Andrew D. Selbst et al. 2019. Fairness and Abstraction in Sociotechnical Systems. In Proceedings of the Conference on
      Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (FAT* '19). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 59-68.
[111] Mark Sendak, Madeleine Clare Elish, Michael Gao, Joseph Futoma, William Ratliff, Marshall Nichols, Armando
      Bedoya, Suresh Balu, and Cara O'Brien. 2020. The human body is a black box: supporting clinical decision-making
      with deep learning. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (FAT* '20).
      Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 99–109.
[112] Judge Craig B. Shaffer. 2012. ‘Defensible’ by What Standard? The Sedona Conference Journal.
[113] Hong Shen, Wesley H. Deng, Aditi Chattopadhyay, Zhiwei Steven Wu, Xu Wang, and Haiyi Zhu. 2021. Value Cards:
      An Educational Toolkit for Teaching Social Impacts of Machine Learning through Deliberation. In Proceedings of the
      2021 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (FAccT '21). Association for Computing
      Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 850–861.
[114] Stephen C Slota, Andrew S. Hoffman, David Ribes and Geoffrey C Bowker. Prospecting (in) the data sciences. Big
      Data & Society. January-June: 1-12, 2020.
[115] Phillip Smith, Norman D. Geddes, Rober Beatty, and Caroline Hayes. 2012. Human-Centered Design of Decision-
      Support Systems. In The Human-Computer Interaction Handbook: Fundamentals, Evolving Technologies, and Emerging
      Applications: 590-615.
[116] Mark D. Smucker, Charles L. A. Clarke, Gordon V. Cormack, and Olga Vechtomova. 2010. University of Waterloo at
      TREC 2010: Legal Interactive. In Proceedings of the Nineteenth Text REtrieval Conference.
[117] Robert Soden, David Ribes, Maggie Jack, Will Sutherland, Vera Khovanskaya, Seyram Avle, Phoebe Sengers, and
      Susanne Bødker. 2019. Fostering Historical Research in CSCW & HCI. In Conference Companion Publication of the
      2019 on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing (CSCW '19). Association for Computing
      Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 517–522.
[118] Robert Soden, David Ribes, Seyram Avle, Will Sutherland. 2021. Time for Historicism in CSCW: An Invitation. In
      Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 5, CSCW2, Article 459 (October 2021).
[119] C. Spinuzzi. 2005. The methodology of participatory design. Technical Communication 52 (2): 163-174.
[120] Robert E. Stake 1995. The Art of Case Study Research. Sage Publications.
[121] Susan Leigh Star and J. Griesemer. 1989. Institutional ecology, ‘Translations’, and Boundary objects: Amateurs and
      professionals on Berkeley’s museum of vertebrate zoology. Social Studies of Science 19:387-420.
[122] Susan Leigh Star. (1989) 2015. The Structure of Ill-Structured Solutions: Boundary Objects and Heterogeneous
      Distributed Problem Solving. In Bowker, Geoffrey C., Stefan Timmermans, Adele E. Clarke, and Ellen Balka, eds.
      Boundary Objects and beyond: Working with Leigh Star. Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press.
[123] Stephen Subrin. 1997. Uniformity in Procedural Rules and the Attributes of a Sound Procedural System: The Case for
      Presumptive Limits. Alabama Law Review 49(1): 79-102.
[124] Lucy Suchman. 1994. Working relations of technology production and use. Computer Supported Cooperative Work 2:
      21-39.
[125] Lucy Suchman. 1995. Making work visible. Communications of the ACM 38(9): 56–64.
[126] Ying Sun. 2010. UB at TREC 2010 Legal Interactive. In Proceedings of the Nineteenth Text REtrieval Conference.
[127] Stefan Timmermans and Iddo Tavory. 2012. “Theory Construction in Qualitative Research: From Grounded Theory
      to Abductive Analysis.” Sociological Theory 30(3): 167-186.
[128] O. H. Titlestad, K. Staring, and J. Braa, 2009. Distributed development to enable user participation: Multilevel design
      in the HISP network. Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems 21 (1), 27-50.
[129] Stephen Tomlinson, Douglas Oard, Jason Baron, and P. Thompson. 2007. TREC Legal Track 2007 Overview. In
      Proceedings of the Sixteenth Text REtrieval Conference.
[130] Maja Van der Velden, C Mörtberg, J Van den Hoven, PE Vermaas, and I Van de Poel. 2014. Participatory design and
      design for values. Development 11, 3 (2014), 215–236
[131] Diane Vaughan. 1992. “Theory Elaboration: The heuristics of case analysis.” In What is a case?, edited by Charles
      Ragin and H.S. Becker. New York: Cambridge University Press.
[132] Victor Stanley v. Creative Pipe, Inc., 250 F.R.D. 251 (D. Md. 2008)
[133] E. M. Voorhees. 2002. The Philosophy of Information Retrieval Evaluation. 355–370. https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-
      45691-0_34.
[134] E. M. Voorhees and Donna Harman. 2009, Text Retrieval Conference (TREC). Encyclopedia of Library and Information
      Sciences.
[135] Jianqiang Wang, Ying Sun, Omar Mukhtar, and Rohini Srihari. 2008. TREC 2008 at the University at Buffalo: Legal
      and Blog Track. In Proceedings of the Seventeenth Text REtrieval Conference.
[136] Christine T. Wolf, Haiyi Zhu, Julia Bullard, Min Kyung Lee, and Jed R. Brubaker. 2018. The Changing Contours of
      “Participation" in Data-driven, Algorithmic Ecosystems: Challenges, Tactics, and an Agenda. In Companion of the
      2018 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing (CSCW '18). Association for
      Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 377–384.

PACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 6, No. CSCW1, Article 51, Publication date: April 2022.
An Uncommon Task: Participatory Design in Legal AI                                                                 51:23

[137] Qian Yang, Aaron Steinfeld, and John Zimmerman. 2019. Unremarkable AI: Fitting Intelligent Decision Support into
      Critical, Clinical Decision-Making Processes. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
      Computing Systems (CHI '19). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Paper 238, 1–11.
[138] Meg Young, Lassana Magassa, and Batya Friedman. 2019. Toward inclusive tech policy design: A method for
      underrepresented voices to strengthen tech policy documents. Ethics and Information Technology 21, 2 (2019), 89–103.
[139] Angela Zhou, David Madra, Inioluwa Deborah Raji, Bogdan Kylych, Smitha Mill and Richard Zemel. 2020. Call for
      Participation: Participatory Approaches to Machine Learning. https://participatoryml.github.io/.
[140] Haiyi Zhu, Bowen Yu, Aaron Halfaker, and Loren Terveen. 2018. Value-Sensitive Algorithm Design: Method, Case
      Study, and Lessons. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. 2, CSCW, Article 194 (November 2018), 23 pages.

Received July 2021; revised November 2021; accepted November 2021.




                PACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 6, No. CSCW1, Article 51, Publication date: April 2022.
