                                                         On the Tool Manipulation Capability of
                                                          Open-source Large Language Models


                                                     Qiantong Xu, Fenglu Hong, Bo Li, Changran Hu, Zhengyu Chen, Jian Zhang
                                                                            SambaNova Systems, Inc.
                                                                                Palo Alto, CA, USA




arXiv:2305.16504v1 [cs.CL] 25 May 2023
                                                               {qiantong.xu,jian.zhang}@sambanovasystems.com

                                                                                        Abstract

                                                     Recent studies on software tool manipulation with large language models (LLMs)
                                                     mostly rely on closed model APIs. The industrial adoption of these models is
                                                     substantially constrained due to the security and robustness risks in exposing in-
                                                     formation to closed LLM API services. In this paper, we ask can we enhance
                                                     open-source LLMs to be competitive to leading closed LLM APIs in tool manipu-
                                                     lation, with practical amount of human supervision. By analyzing common tool
                                                     manipulation failures, we first demonstrate that open-source LLMs may require
                                                     training with usage examples, in-context demonstration and generation style regu-
                                                     lation to resolve failures. These insights motivate us to revisit classical methods
                                                     in LLM literature, and demonstrate that we can adapt them as model alignment
                                                     with programmatic data generation, system prompts and in-context demonstration
                                                     retrievers to enhance open-source LLMs for tool manipulation. To evaluate these
                                                     techniques, we create ToolBench1 , a tool manipulation benchmark consisting of
                                                     diverse software tools for real-world tasks. We demonstrate that our techniques can
                                                     boost leading open-source LLMs by up to 90% success rate, showing capabilities
                                                     competitive to OpenAI GPT-4 in 4 out of 8 ToolBench tasks. We show that such
                                                     enhancement typically requires about one developer day to curate data for each
                                                     tool, rendering a recipe with practical amount of human supervision.


                                         1       Introduction

                                         Tool-augmented large language models (LLMs) recently emerge as a research frontier. Such aug-
                                         mented LLMs demonstrate tool manipulation capabilities which automate software operations through
                                         natural language instructions [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. Despite the fact that open-source LLMs substantially
                                         shrink the quality gap towards proprietary closed LLMs in tasks such as chatbot [6, 7, 8, 9], recent
                                         tool-augmented LLMs still mostly rely on closed LLM APIs [1, 2, 3, 4]. This leads to a fundamental
                                         barrier for the industrial adoption of these augmented LLMs due to security and robustness risks
                                         associated with exposing enterprise-internal workflows and information to closed LLM APIs [10, 11].
                                         To maximize the industrial impact, there is a substantial need for tool manipulation capabilities
                                         founded on open-source LLMs. To this end, we ask can we build on open-source LLMs with practical
                                         amount of human supervision and achieve tool manipulation capabilities competitive to closed LLMs.
                                         In this paper, we first demystify key challenges for tool manipulation using open-source LLMs; we
                                         then leverage the insights to suggest practical recipes for enhancement. Concretely, we study the
                                         setting shown in Figure 1 where LLMs take in a natural language instruction as the goal and generate
                                         API calls to accomplish the goal. Although we expect a quality gap between the open-source and
                                         closed LLMs [12], what we observe is a far more severe disparity. Specifically, for an on-sale house
                                         searching tool, a leading open LLM for code generation fails every test case while the OpenAI GPT-
                                             1
                                                 Available at https://github.com/sambanova/toolbench


                                         Preprint. Under review.
Figure 1: Tool manipulation setup. We augment LLMs as action generators with access to API
documentations. In a single-step scenario, an action generator directly generates API calls to
accomplish the goal. A multi-step action generator iterates with an environment using API calls and
generates the next-step calls based on the information from the environment until an exit state.
 Action Generator       Single-step Manipulation                           Multi-step Manipulation


                      Goal           Action Generator       Goal                Observation                 Exit state
    API docs

                                                                   Action Generator           Environment

                                         Executed
                    API calls                                                     API calls
       LLM                                results




4 [13] attains 77% success rate across the same one hundred examples. This observation motivates us
to study the challenges for open-source LLMs to attain strong tool manipulation capability.
During our investigation, we identify three key challenges that impede the performance of open-source
LLMs in tool manipulation. Firstly, open-source models often struggle to accurately identify API
names, whereas closed LLMs demonstrate the capability to invoke the correct APIs without explicit
usage examples or documentation during inference. This suggests that closed LLMs hypothetically
internalize knowledge of API usage during training. Secondly, we show that without demonstration
examples, open-source LLMs often fail to populate the appropriate values for API arguments. Thirdly,
we demonstrate that open-source LLMs tend to produce non-executable generation, such as natural
language beyond the desired code.
Our insights suggest us to revisit three simple techniques from LLMs for conventional NLP tasks. In
the context of tool manipulation, we adapt them with practical amount of supervision and use them to
enhance open-source LLMs. Model alignment: To first internalize API usage knowledge, we perform
instruction tuning [14, 15] with programatically generated data. Specifically, we first write a few
dozens of templates on goals and corresponding API calls. We then pragmatically bootstrap the data
volume by instantiating templates with concrete key word values. In-context demonstration retriever:
Inspired by retrieval-augmented generation [16, 17, 18], we additionally enhance the LLMs with a
retriever to leverage in-context demonstrations during inference. This module selects demonstration
examples with the most semantically similar goals from a human-curated pool of examples. Given n
API functions, the retriever only requires O (n) examples where every API function appears in at least
one example. We then leverage LLMs to generalize to goals achieved by unseen API combinations.
System prompt: Finally we embed goal descriptions into a pre-defined system prompt which provides
inference-time guidelines to generate executable API calls; such system prompts were shown to
regulate language style in chatbots [19]. These techniques only require a small amount of human
supervision. Thus they render a potentially practical recipe for building on top of open-source LLMs.
To extensively evaluate the inspired techniques, we present ToolBench, a benchmark suite on eight
diverse tools ranging from Google Sheets manipulation to controlling robots [20]. It enables the first
publicly-available quantitative evaluation test bench among the ones brought up in the tool-augmented
LLM literature [2, 3]. For the software tools in our benchmark, LLMs need to accomplish a variety
of goals by selecting and combining API functions from up to a hundred candidates.
Using the tools in the ToolBench suite, we first empirically show that leading open-source LLMs
can demonstrate up to 78% lower success rate when compared to the OpenAI GPT-4 APIs. We then
demonstrate that these simple techniques can substantially improve the success rate of open-source
LLMs by up to 90%, attaining results competitive or better than OpenAI GPT-4 models in 4 out of
the 8 tools in our benchmark2 . To reveal the impact of different techniques, we provide evidence
that aligning model with synthetic data primarily contributes to the significant improvement of
open-source LLMs. The system prompt and the in-context demonstration retriever further enhance
the performance. During the enhancement process, we observe that, on average, it takes just one day
for a developer to craft the in-context demonstrations and curate the templates for generating model
alignment data. This implies that the recipe requires a practical level of human supervision.
   2
    We apply the same system prompt and in-context example retriever for GPT-4. Model alignment is not
applicable to GPT-4 as there is no publicly available tuning APIs for it during our experiments.


                                                        2
Our contributions and the structure of this paper are as follows.
• In Section 3, we reveal challenges in API selection, argument populating and non-executable
  generation which hinder open-source LLMs on tool manipulation.
• To alleviate the challenges, we revisit simple techniques for conventional NLP tasks. We adapt them
  for tool manipulation to boost open-source LLMs with minimal human supervision in Section 4.
• In Section 5, we introduce the ToolBench, the first open-sourced benchmark with pre-defined test
  cases for quantitative evaluation compared to the ones in the recent tool-augmented LLM literature.
• We demonstrate in Section 6 that our adapted techniques boost open-source LLMs by up to 90%
  success rate, showing competitiveness with GPT-4 APIs in 4 out of 8 ToolBench tasks.

2     Background
To establish backgrounds, we first concretize the software tool manipulation setup. We then present
a preliminary observation on the capability of open-source LLMs. This observation motivates our
study on the challenges in Section 3 which inspire simple techniques for enhancements in Section 4.

2.1   Tool manipulation setup

In this paper, we study the scenario where software users intend to translate a naturallanguage goal de-
scription g into a sequence of application programming interface (API) calls Cg = c0 , c1 , · · · , cng
to accomplish the goal. We study tool manipulation with open-source LLMs in this specific setting,
because APIs serve as the prevalent abstraction for developers and users in modern software systems.

Large language model Autoregressive language models encode probabilities of the next word
xN +1 given x0 , x1 , · · · , xN as the context sequence [21]. By sampling from this conditional probabil-
ity p (xN +1 |x0 , x1 , · · · , xN ) iteratively, it generates language continuations from given contexts. In
the recent wave of scaling up model size and training data volume, transformer-based language models
show unprecedented capability in instruction following for text and code generation [22, 23, 24]. In
the context of tool manipulation, we cast goal descriptions and optional information as an instruction
in the context and task the LLMs to generate code for API calls as the continuation.

Action generator A key implementation for tool Algorithm 1 API Call Generation
manipulation is an action generator A which maps
a goal g to API calls Cg . As open-source LLMs Input: Goal g, API docs D, action generator A
likely have not seen the information regarding the Input: Optional info O
relevant APIs, we augment an LLM M into an ac- 1: procedure ACTION G EN(g, D, A, O)
                                                        2:     Dg ← R (g, D) ▷ Retrieve API functions
tion generator by providing access to a pool of m 3:           Cg ← A (g, Dg , O) ▷ API call generation
candidate API functions D = {d0 , d1 , · · · , dm }. 4:        return Cg
Due to the input sequence length limit of LLMs, 5: end procedure
we provide an optional retriever R to retain a rele-
vant subset of API documents Dg = R (g, D) ∈ D. Thus, the action generator produces the sequence
of API calls Cg = A (g, Dg , O), where O represents the optional information that can be included in
the prompt. This is a naive way of retrieval augmented generation [18, 25, 26] and we employ an
off-the-shelf retriever implementation [27] for our study, but we also highly encourage the community
to explore algorithms tailored for the action generator.

Single and multi-step tool manipulation As shown in Figure 1, an action generator may interact
with software in either a single-step or a multi-step scenario. In a single-step scenario, action
generator directly produces an API call sequence Cg = A (g, Dg , ∅). In a multi-step scenario, the
action generator produces a series of API call sequences Cg = ∪i Cg,i where each segment Cg,i is
used to interact with a predefined environment E and generates the observation Oi = E(Cg,i ). The
observation is then used to generate a new segment Cg,i+1 = A (g, Dg , Oi ). The process stops at an
exit state. Throughout the remainder of this paper, we use the single-step setup for illustration clarity
unless stated otherwise. Our experiments in Section 6 cover both single and multi-step cases.

2.2   Motivating Observation


                                                     3
Table 2: Example of tool manipulation errors.                   Figure 2: Without API documentation exposure dur-
Errors are highlighted in red.                                  ing inference, closed LLMs attain high accuracy in
                       # To move the robot to position (x, y)   selecting APIs (left), implying potential example us-
                       robot.move_to(x, y)                      age exposure during training. Hand-picked oracle
          Goal         # To raise the arm by a given height
                       robot.raise_arm(height)
                                                                one-shot demonstration improves success rate over
                       Task: how to move a robot to (20, 30)?   zero-shot on the OpenWeather (right), showing the
    Expected results   robot.move_to(20, 30)                    roofline impact of in-context demonstrations.




                                                                API selection acc.
      Wrong API        robot.raise_arm(20)                                                             goal only                                     zero-shot
                                                                                                                                   80

                                                                                                                    Success rate
                                                                                                                                                     one-shot
 Wrong Arguments       robot.move_to(30, 20)                                         60
                                                                                                                                   60
                       You can create a robot with                                                                                 40
                       robot = Robot()                                               30
    Non-executable                                                                                                                 20
                       and move it to the target location by
                       robot.move_to(20, 30)                                         0                                              0
                                                                                             -4   A      er    en                          -4   A      er    en
                                                                                          GPT LLaMStarCod CodeG                         GPT LLaMStarCod CodeG




To assess the tool manipulation capability of Table 1: Huge capability gaps on a house searching
open-source LLMs, we compare them to Ope- task. Open-source LLMs lag behind the OpenAI
nAI GPT-4 API using the setup discussed in Sec- GPT-4 by 70% on success rate.
tion 2.1. In this preliminary comparison, we ini-
tially anticipate the closed LLMs go exhibit an       Model     GPT-4 LLaMA StarCoder CodeGen
advantage in tool manipulation, as observed in     Open source    ✗      ✓        ✓          ✓
traditional NLP tasks [12]. However we observe     Success rate 77%     0%       7%         0%
a significantly larger gap than expected. For in-
stance, in a home search task, open-source LLMs have a hard time to generate correct API calls,
resulting in a 70% success rate gap compared to the zero-shot GPT-4 APIs as shown in Table 1. Such
gap motivates us to study what impedes open-source LLM’ performance.

3        Challenges for open-source LLMs
To demystify key challenges, we study the Table 3: Categorized typical tool manipulation error
behaviors of open-source LLMs in tool ma- types on a weather query tool.
nipulation. By analyzing common mistakes
in a weather query task, we discover three                      GPT-4 LLaMA StarCoder CodeGen
challenges to attain strong tool manipula-       Failure rate    19%      61%       68%       93%
tion capabilities. As shown in Table 2, we
                                                API selection     0%      22%       22%       30%
observe that open-source LLMs often face Args. populating        14%      32%       23%       63%
difficulty in (1) API selection, (2) API ar- Non-executable      5%        7%       23%        0%
gument population, and (3) generating le-
gitimate and executable code 3 . These insights are described in detail in this section and inspire the
techniques to alleviate the challenges in Section 4.

Difficulty in API selection We observe that API selection failures often involve using incorrect APIs
and even hallucinating non-existent API names. To quantitatively understand the intrinsic capability
in API selection, we compare open-source LLMs to GPT-4 without providing any documentation
or in-context demonstrations during inference. The results, as shown in Figure 2 for the weather
query tool OpenWeather, reveal that GPT-4 can choose the right API without additional information
beyond the goal, while open-source models struggle. Such capability disparity entails that closed
LLMs potentially internalize knowledge of API usage during training.

Confusion in populating arguments After the action generator selects the appropriate APIs, the
subsequent challenge lies in parsing the goal description and populating the API arguments. At this
stage, we observe that open-source models often provide wrong values for the required API arguments.
The confusion in argument populating contributes to up to 63% of the failures in open-source models,
     3
    If a failure case has multiple errors, we categorize it by the first triggered category in the following order:
non-executable generation, wrong API selection, wrong argument populating


                                                                  4
as shown in Table 3. In an attempt to mitigate this issue, we provide the LLMs with a hand-picked
oracle in-context demonstration which achieves the same goal with different argument values. We
show in Figure 2 that the hand-picked oracle examples improve success rates by up to 45%. It
is important to note that oracle examples are not intended as a solution for argument populating
confusion, as they are hand-picked on a per-test-case basis. Nonetheless, these observations suggest
that in-context demonstrations can substantially enhance open-source LLMs for tool manipulation.

Non-executable generation The third common failure of open-source LLMs is non-executable
generation. Such failures encompass issues such as language verbosity around API calls and adher-
ence to natural language based guidelines, as shown in Table 2. Open-source models sometimes
exhibit such errors in 23% of one hundred weather query cases. These observations underscore the
necessity of regulating open-source LLMs to exclusively generate code.

4     Boosting Open-source LLMs for Tool Manipulation
The insights from Section 3 emphasize the importance of tuning with API usage examples, in-context
demonstration and generation regulation in the domain of tool manipulation. In this section, we
revisit three techniques from the LLM literature and adapt them to address the aforementioned
challenges, using a practical amount of human supervision. We first introduce model alignment with
programatically curated data to internalize API usage knowledge in Section 4.1. We then discuss
augmenting open-source LLMs with an in-context demonstration retriever in Section 4.2. Lastly, we
apply a system prompt to regulate generation in Section 4.3. These techniques collectively serve as a
strong baseline for alleviating the challenges presented in Section 3 and inspiring further innovations.

4.1   Multi-tool model alignment with programmatic data curation

Model alignment, through tuning LLMs with usage examples, plays a vital role in improving LLMs
for capabilities such as instruction following and conversation [14, 19, 28]. In light of our insights
from in Section 3, we recognize the potential of model alignment with API usage examples to improve
API selection capability. To practically leverage such alignment for tool manipulation, it requires a
data curation strategy without massive manual example writing. Towards this end, we prototype a
method which generates usage examples from human-curated templates.
Figure 3 depicts our flow to generate alignment data. Figure 3: Programmatic training data gen-
We create a handful of templates consisting of goal de- eration using templates and random values
scriptions and corresponding API calls. These templates                 Templates
contain one or more placeholder pairs. Each of these                                    Random Value Pool
                                                              Task:                   position: location (20, 30)
pairs maps to a key word in the goal and an argument in       Move the robot to               move: raise
                                                              {position}, and {move}         height: 5cm
the corresponding API calls. We also provide a pool of        the arm by {height}.               x: 20
                                                                                                 y: 30
candidate values for each keyword and randomly choose                                             h: 5
                                                              API Calls:
values to fill in the placeholders within the template.       robot.move_to({x}, {y})
Given a tool with n candidate APIs, we only require           robot.raise_arm({h})       position: the corner
                                                                                              move: raise
O(n) human-curated templates to ensure practical hu-                                      height: 0.5 meter
                                                                                                  x: 0
man supervision. Specifically we use a principle where                Training Data               y: 0
                                                                                                 h: 50
each of the n APIs is encouraged to appear in at least       Task:
one template. In practice, we find it takes on average one   Move the robot to                     ...
                                                             location (20, 30),
day for one developer to curate the data for one software    and raise the arm by          position: (0, 40)
                                                             5cm.                             move: drop
tool in our benchmark; this includes writing the goal                                        height: 10cm
templates, providing the pool of argument values and         API Calls:                           x: 0
                                                                                                 y: 40
                                                             robot.move_to(20, 30)
generate the data. We provide example templates we use       robot.raise_arm(5)
                                                                                                 h: -10

for different tools in Appendix C. With data curated for
all the tools, we perform model alignment tuning jointly for all tools and produce a single model.

4.2   Demonstration retrieval

In Section 3, we demonstrate the efficacy of hand-picked oracle examples in improving argument
populating. However, extending from oracles to practical in-context demonstration poses two
challenges. First, given n API function candidates, there are exponentially many combinations of
API calls associated with different goals. Thus, LLMs should be capable of generalizing to a wide


                                                       5
variety of goals based on a limited number of examples. Second, to ensure effective demonstration, it
is important to provide LLMs with only the relevant examples without human interventions.
To fulfill the above two desiderata, we augment open-source LLMs with a demonstration retriever
module. This module revolves around a repository where every API is required to appear in only
one human-curated demonstration. This implies that only O(n) examples are needed. Among these
demonstration examples, the retriever selects the most semantically similar examples to the goal
descriptions.

Validation To verify the effectiveness of demonstration          Figure 4: In-context demonstration can
examples in practice, we empirically show that the retrieved     improve both closed and open-source
demonstrations can improve the success rate on goals re-         models on Home Search, a tool for
quiring API combinations unseen in the example repository.       browsing houses on sale.
In particular, we evaluate this approach on the home search
                                                                                 90


                                                                  Success rate
task which exposes 15 API functions and requires mul-
tiple functions to accomplish each goal. With only 10                            60
human-curated demonstrations that do not precisely match
                                                                                 30
any of the 100 test cases in terms of API combinations,
the retrieved demonstrations can boost the success rate
by up to 79% across open-source LLMs and make GPT-4                                   0   1    2 3 4 5 6 7                8
                                                                                              In-context examples
nearly perfect, as shown in Figure 4. This shows that the
demonstration examples can improve tool manipulation for                                         GPT-4      LLaMA

unseen types of goals with a repository of size O(n) only.                                      StarCoder   CodeGen



4.3   Generation regulation with system prompts

The use of system prompts is a well-established tech-     Figure 5: System prompt with guidelines to
nique in chatbots powered by LLMs [19]. By incorpo-       only generate code in a desired format. Red
rating human-chatbot conversations, system prompts        parts are populated with real data for each
can effectively control the natural language style of     test case during inference.
the generated responses. In the context of tool manipu-
                                                          … As the AI API Assistant, my focus is on assembling the APIs in
lation, we regularize open-source LLMs to exclusively     the correct order to achieve the desired outcome without
                                                          introducing any new APIs or unnecessary information. …
generate API calls with a system prompt in Figure 5,
where the black part is the template shared across        Here is a list of API functions:
                                                          {A list of API functions}
all tasks and the red rows are instantiated during in-    -----------------------------------
                                                          To guide me in generating the executable code snippet, use the
ference for a certain goal. Our system prompt first       following format. Within the three ticks I will be generate code only:
defines a format that combines text sections contain-     Task: Goal
                                                          Action:
ing goals, demonstrations, and generations. It then       ```
                                                          API_function_name1(args1, args2)
provides explicit guidelines in natural language, in-     API_function_name2(args3)
                                                          ```
structing the LLMs to generate code exclusively. The
system prompt incorporates the goal description and       Here is a list of demonstration examples:
                                                          {A list of demonstration examples}
the retrieved API functions directly for each request,    -----------------------------------
                                                          Task: {Goal}
reducing the human development effort to a one-time       Action:
task.                                                     ```




5     ToolBench: A New Tool Manipulation Benchmark
To evaluate open-source LLMs in the domain of tool manipulation, we curate a benchmark suite from
both existing datasets and newly collected ones. This benchmark stands out as the first open-source
test bench with predefined test cases for quantitative evaluation, distinguishing it from recent tool
manipulation research using closed LLMs [2, 3]. In this section, we introduce the software tools and
the evaluation infrastructure. We also demonstrate the level of challenges posed by each tool, in terms
of the ability to generalize to unseen API combinations and the requirement for advanced reasoning.

5.1   Software tools and evaluation infrastructure

As shown in Table 4, our benchmark consists of five tasks we collected and three tasks derived from
existing datasets, including VirtualHome[29, 30], Webshop[31] and Tabletop[20]. They cover both
single-step and multiple-step action generation, which requires selecting and combining from 2 to 108


                                                  6
Table 4: Tasks in the ToolBench. We provide demonstration examples for few-shot in-context-
learning while test cases are for quantitatively evaluation. We develop API complexity, a metric to
quantify the challenge level in generalizing to unseen API combinations; higher complexity indicates
more challenging tasks. We package the challenges beyond API complexity as advanced reasoning.
We refer to Appendix A for more details on these tasks.
                                                     Single Step                                   Multi-Step
                           Open     The Cat   Home        Trip     Google                    WebShop
           Task                                                              VirtualHome                     Tabletop
                          Weather    API      Search     Booking   Sheets                   Long / Short
        Data
   API functions             9        6        15           20      108           40             2                32
Demonstration examples      18       12        10          11        10          83          1533 / 200           74
     Test cases             100      100       100         120       70          100            100               105
 Level of challenges
  API complexity             2.2      1.4      7.3         11.1     8.4          12.3             0.0             4.6
 Advanced reasoning                                                 ✓                             ✓               ✓



API functions to accomplish the goals. Each task consists of approximately approximately 100 test
cases, including goal descriptions and the ground truth API calls. We also provide a limited number
of demonstration examples to aid model predictions4 . We include a comprehensive introduction and
analysis of each task within the benchmark in Appendix A.
We use success rate as the primary evaluation metric for most tasks, except for the WebShop where
we report rewards, as well as for VirtualHome where we use executability and Longest Common
Subsequence (LCS), following the original metrics proposed by the respective authors. To facilitate
evaluation, we build an infrastructure that executes the API calls generated by the action generators
and assess the final outcome. This process enables reliable evaluation of tool manipulation capabilities
without restricting the action generators to perfectly match the ground truth API calls.

5.2       Level of challenges

To assess the level of challenge, we examine ToolBench tasks                Table 5: A typical task of Google
based on their API complexity and the requirement for ad-                   Sheets manipulation. It requires
vanced reasoning. Intuitively, API complexity indicates the                 both selecting the correct API func-
challenges in generalizing to unseen API combinations and                   tion and reasoning on the arguments.
non-default argument values. Challenges beyond API com-
plexity then involve advanced reasoning.                                       Product     Cost           Price
                                                                                beef       1                3
API Complexity To quantify the challenge in generalizing                        pork       5                4
to unseen API combinations, we develop a task-agnostic com-                    chicken     10              11
plexity score S ∈ R+
                   0 , where                                                   Task: Update beef’s price to 10.
                                                                               Action:
                  S(T , X , D) = Et∈T mine∈X d(t, e).               (1)        worksheet.update("C2", 10)
It averages over all the test samples in the test set T on the
minimum distance between t and any demonstration example e from the example pool X . In
particular, the distance d(t, e) between each test sample t and a demonstration example e is negatively
proportional to the probability of transforming the API combination of e to match that of t, by
randomly dropping the API functions irrelevant to t and inserting the uncovered API functions
required by t from the API pool D. We refer to the details of the complexity score to Appendix D and
list their values in Table 4. The score is non-negative and the higher the score is, the more complex a
task is. Despite the fact that this complexity score reflects the challenge level of API selection, it does
not capture all the difficulties of a task. A task with low complexity score can still be very challenging
as it might require advanced reasoning. For instance, even though Webshop is challenging, the API
selection complexity of it is zero. This is because there are only two API functions requiring only one
argument each in Webshop, and they are both covered by the examples, so there is no API selection
complexity.
      4
     For WebShop, we find that more than O(n) demonstration examples can improve the success rate. Nonethe-
less, these examples can be acquired from programmatic software operations without heavy human curation.


                                                          7
Advanced reasoning Within our benchmark, advanced reasoning encompasses challenges beyond
generalizing to unseen API combinations. These challenges include non API-based coding for tasks
such as Google Sheets and Tabletop, as well as decision-making based on observations returned
from the WebShop environment. For instance, in the Google Sheets example shown in Table 5, the
coordinate of the beef price’s cell ("C2") cannot be easily derived from either the goal or the table
itself. The action generator needs to understand the content or write additional python code to derive
this coordinate before calling the API function. In the similar scenario, WebShop task requires the
action generator to extract the exact button ID to click on the webpage given the description. These
challenges, categorized as advanced reasoning, complement the API complexity category.

6         Experiment
In this section, we leverage the ToolBench to empirically validate the techniques introduced in
Section 4. First, to concretize the capability gap between open-source and closed LLMs, we
demonstrate that OpenAI GPT-4 API can have substantially higher success rate than representative
open-source LLMs in Section 6.2. We then show in Section 6.3 that the simple techniques in Section 4
can boost open-source LLMs to achieve success rates competitive to in-context-learning with GPT-4
APIs5 in four out of the eight tasks. Through ablation studies in Section 6.4, we additionally show
that model alignment does the heavy lifting for boosting open-source LLMs, while system prompt
and in-context learning robustify LLMs for further improvement.

6.1       Experiment Setup

To establish strong baselines, we use GPT-4 API as the representative closed LLM in our study
because it attains the leading accuracy in mainstream NLP tasks. In our study, we compare LLAMA-
30B [32], StarCoder [33] and CodeGen-16B-mono [34] to GPT-4. LLAMA represents open research
models, while StarCoder and CodeGen are publicly available for both research and commercial
purposes. We choose these three models due to their superior performance on ToolBench among
open-source models as shown in Table 96 . In our experiments, we consider the zero-shot setting as the
out-of-the-box configuration where only API documentation is provided without any demonstration
examples. We use this configuration to understand the initial gap in capabilities among models. We
then incorporate all available techniques on top of this initial configuration to assess their benefits.
For the original Tabletop dataset [20], which includes examples in a few-shot setting without explicit
API definitions, we only evaluate settings with in-context demonstrations. More detailed setup
information is included in Appendix C. We run each job 3 times with different random seeds and
report average accuracy. The variation is minimal, so we ignore them in the main paper but report
them in appendix.

6.2       Capability Gap

Table 6 exhibits significant disparities in tool manipulation between the closed GPT-4 API and
open-source models in the out-of-the-box zero-shot setting. For simpler tasks, namely Open Weather
and the Cat API, which require only one API call for each goal, the open-source models exhibit
success rates up to 74% lower than GPT-4. Furthermore, on all the remaining tasks other than the
Webshop, none of the LLAMA, the StarCoder and the CodeGen model can reach meaningful accuracy
or compare with GPT-4. These results highlight an opportunity to enhance open-source LLMs.

6.3       Boosting open-source LLMs

To boost the open-source LLMs, we first perform model alignment using programmatially generated
data. We then apply a system prompt and a 3-shot demonstration retriever during inference. Given
GPT-4 does not provide tuning APIs, we enhance the out-of-the-box GPT-4 with the same system
prompt and demonstration retriever as the baseline. The improvements from the combined enhance-
ment techniques are shown in Table 6, where the success rates of the open-source LLMs can improve
up to 90%. As a result, the open-source models achieve competitive or better success rates on 4 out
      5
   GPT-4 tuning APIs were not released by the time this work is done.
      6
   Surprisingly, we observe that for tool manipulations, open-source LLMs instruction-tuned for conventional
NLP tasks do not outperform their base models before tuning.


                                                     8
Table 6: Capability gap in tool manipulation is substantial between closed API and open-source
LLMs in the out-of-the-box zero-shot setting. Using model alignment, the in-context demonstration
retriever and the system prompt, open-soured LLMs attain significant boost in success rate. GPT-4 is
enhanced with the retriever and system prompt. Tabletop is only evaluated in the few-shot fashion.
                          Open The Cat Home    Trip   Google              WebShop
         Task                                                VirtualHome            Tabletop
                         Weather API   Search Booking Sheets             Long Short
  Zero-shot Baseline
        GPT-4             81.3     97.4    76.6       91.5   5.7     40.8 / 8.0          0.0          -
     LLaMA-30b            39.0     49.0    0.0         0.0   0.0     78.0 / 0.3          0.0          -
      StarCoder           32.0     71.0     7.0       13.3   5.9     22.0 / 3.7          0.0          -
  CodeGen-16B-mono        7.0      78.0    0.0         0.0   1.4      4.0/ 1.0           0.0          -
Enhanced w/ techniques
       GPT-4               99.0    98.0    98.0       99.2   68.6    29.0 / 21.7   0.0         0.0   83.8
    LLaMA-30b             100.0    94.0    87.0       85.8    2.9    16.0 / 24.3   0.0         0.0    7.5
     StarCoder             99.0    97.0    83.0       80.8   21.2    31.0 / 18.4   0.0         0.0   13.9
 CodeGen-16B-mono         97.7     99.0    82.0       77.5   19.8    29.0 / 17.2   0.0         3.5   16.2



of 8 tasks, including Open Weather, the Cat API, VirturalHome and WebShop. Moreover, on Home
Search and Trip Booking, the gap between the LLAMA model and the GPT-4 API is reduced to 11%
and 13.4% respectively, compared to the initial gap of up to 91%. Despite the fact that open-source
models are still lagging behind on the Google Sheets and Tabletop, these observations show that
our recipe can significantly improve the performance of open-source LLMs and attain success rates
comparable to GPT-4 API on many of the ToolBench tasks.

Human supervision To identify the practicality of an enhancement recipe, the amount of required
human supervision is a crucial factor. In our approach, human supervision is primarily in the form
of in-context demonstration examples and alignment data templates. Regarding the demonstration
examples, we provide 10 to 83 examples for each task as shown in Table 4, except for WebShop given
its difficulty in advanced reasoning. As shown in Table 10, the number of templates for alignment
data is typically less than 100 for each task. We observe that providing these supervisions takes one
developer day on average, making it practical in terms of the time cost on human supervision.

Remaining challenges In our experiments, we observe that the boosted open-source LLMs still
have relatively low success rates on tasks that require advanced reasoning, such as Google Sheets,
WebShop and Tabletop tasks. This implies the need to further enhance the reasoning capabilities of
open-source models. We are excited about the prospect of more exploration from the community to
address the challenges for tool manipulation on these complex tasks.

6.4   Ablation Study

We break down the contribution of the techniques in Table 7: The number of ToolBench tasks
two ways. First, we apply each technique individually improved (+N) or hurt (-N) over the base-
on top of the out-of-the-box zero-shot configuration lines when adding or dropping techniques.
and evaluate its impact. As shown in Table 7, both the
3-shot in-context demonstration and model alignment                  LLaMA StarCoder CodeGen
techniques bump up the success rates across all tasks, Zero-shot        -       -         -
while the system prompt only benefits simple tasks that + Sys. Prompt +4       +4        +4
involve relatively fewer API calls for each goal.       + 3-shot       +8      +8        +8
Next, we consider the combination of all techniques + Alignment              +7       +7         +7
and remove them one at a time to evaluate their rela- Full system             -        -          -
tive contributions within the full system. As shown in - Sys. Prompt         -0       -2         -3
in Table 7, solely removing model alignment triggers - 3-shot                -3       -4         -5
success rate degradation in up to 7 tasks, while remov- - Alignment          -5       -5         -7
ing either in-context demonstration up to 5 tasks and
dropping system prompt up to 3. We notice that the tasks that are not significantly impacted when
removing techniques are typically the ones with relatively low success rate (usually <20% even in the
full system). Thus, those accuracy changes are hypothetically subject to high variance and fluctuation.
The full results from the experiments in this section can be found in Table 12.


                                                  9
7   Related work

Our work establishes a strong connection to the LLM-driven program synthesis. In contrast to
the conventional rule-based code generation in popular compilation frameworks [35], recent auto-
regressive LLMs such as CodeGen[34], SantaCoder[36] and StarCoder[33] treat the problem as
a sequence generation task and demonstrate superior capabilities in emitting semantically correct
computer programs. We use CodeGen as a representative from these models in our study for API call
generation.
Tool manipulation are also known as tool augmented learning [3, 37]. Some of the works seek to
augment generations with the execution results from various tools[1, 38, 39, 26, 40, 41, 42], while
another line of works focus on executing the tools themselves, including embodied robotic learning
[20, 30, 43, 44, 45], and automation for other tools [31, 46, 47, 48]. We focus on the study of the
second stream with different models and techniques.
Recent works in tool manipulation with LLMs mostly study techniques to enhance in-context-
learning with closed LLMs APIs [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. In contrast, we study simple techniques to allow for
developers to practically build on top of open-source LLMs. The three techniques we mention in this
paper [19, 22, 26, 49] are well studied in the conventional NLP tasks. We revisit and adapt them in the
context of tool manipulation on open-source models with a practical amount of human supervision.
In the recent LLM literature, there are several works presenting tool manipulation benchmarks [2, 3].
Compared to these benchmarks, the ToolBench is the first one providing predefined test cases for
evaluation on real execution results.


8   Conclusion

In this paper, we answer the question can we enhance open-source LLMs to compete with leading
closed LLM APIs in tool manipulation, with practical amount of human supervision. Drawing from
our observations of the common tool manipulation failures and insights from the literature on conven-
tional NLP tasks with LLM, we propose to instantiate model alignment with programmatical data
generation, system prompts, and in-context demonstration retrievers to improve the tool manipulation
capability of open-source models. To comprehensively evaluate the impact of these techniques, we
create the ToolBench, a benchmark consisting of diverse software tools for real-world tasks. Our
results demonstrate that these techniques can make the leading open-source LLMs competitive with
the OpenAI GPT-4 in 4 out of 8 ToolBench tasks, all achieved with a practical amount of human
labeling effort.


Acknowledgments and Disclosure of Funding

We sincerely appreciate the helpful discussion with Urmish Thakker, Tian Zhao, Raghu Prabhakar,
Kaizhao Liang, Petro Junior Milan, Bowen Yang, Qinghua Li and Yaqi Zhang.


References
 [1] T. Schick, J. Dwivedi-Yu, R. Dessì, R. Raileanu, M. Lomeli, L. Zettlemoyer, N. Cancedda, and
     T. Scialom, “Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves to use tools,” arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2302.04761, 2023.
 [2] M. Li, F. Song, B. Yu, H. Yu, Z. Li, F. Huang, and Y. Li, “Api-bank: A benchmark for
     tool-augmented llms,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.08244, 2023.
 [3] Y. Qin, S. Hu, Y. Lin, W. Chen, N. Ding, G. Cui, Z. Zeng, Y. Huang, C. Xiao, C. Han et al.,
     “Tool learning with foundation models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.08354, 2023.
 [4] S. Gravitas. (2023) Auto-gpt: An autonomous gpt-4 experiment. [Online]. Available:
     https://github.com/Significant-Gravitas/Auto-GPT
 [5] Y. Shen, K. Song, X. Tan, D. Li, W. Lu, and Y. Zhuang, “Hugginggpt: Solving ai tasks with
     chatgpt and its friends in huggingface,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17580, 2023.


                                                 10
 [6] W.-L. Chiang, Z. Li, Z. Lin, Y. Sheng, Z. Wu, H. Zhang, L. Zheng, S. Zhuang, Y. Zhuang, J. E.
     Gonzalez, I. Stoica, and E. P. Xing, “Vicuna: An open-source chatbot impressing gpt-4 with
     90%* chatgpt quality,” March 2023. [Online]. Available: https://vicuna.lmsys.org
 [7] T. Computer, “Openchatkit: An open toolkit and base model for dialogue-style applications,” 3
     2023. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/togethercomputer/OpenChatKit
 [8] O.-A. Team, “Laion: Open-assistant,” April 2023. [Online]. Available: https://open-assistant.io/
     chat
 [9] Databricks, “Databricks’ dolly, a large language model trained on the databricks machine
     learning platform,” 3 2023. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/databrickslabs/dolly
[10] Bloomberg. (2023) Samsung bans staff’s ai use after spotting chatgpt
     data leak. [Online]. Available: https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2023-05-02/
     samsung-bans-chatgpt-and-other-generative-ai-use-by-staff-after-leak#xj4y7vzkg
[11] CNN. (2023) Jpmorgan restricts employee use of chatgpt. [Online]. Available: https:
     //www.cnn.com/2023/02/22/tech/jpmorgan-chatgpt-employees/index.html
[12] P. Liang, R. Bommasani, T. Lee, D. Tsipras, D. Soylu, M. Yasunaga, Y. Zhang, D. Narayanan,
     Y. Wu, A. Kumar et al., “Holistic evaluation of language models,” arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2211.09110, 2022.
[13] OpenAI, “GPT-4 technical report,” Mar. 2023.
[14] L. Ouyang, J. Wu, X. Jiang, D. Almeida, C. Wainwright, P. Mishkin, C. Zhang, S. Agarwal,
     K. Slama, A. Ray et al., “Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback,”
     Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 35, pp. 27 730–27 744, 2022.
[15] Y. Bai, S. Kadavath, S. Kundu, A. Askell, J. Kernion, A. Jones, A. Chen, A. Goldie, A. Mirho-
     seini, C. McKinnon et al., “Constitutional ai: Harmlessness from ai feedback,” arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2212.08073, 2022.
[16] S. Borgeaud, A. Mensch, J. Hoffmann, T. Cai, E. Rutherford, K. Millican, G. B. Van Den Driess-
     che, J.-B. Lespiau, B. Damoc, A. Clark et al., “Improving language models by retrieving
     from trillions of tokens,” in International conference on machine learning. PMLR, 2022, pp.
     2206–2240.
[17] H. Li, Y. Su, D. Cai, Y. Wang, and L. Liu, “A survey on retrieval-augmented text generation,”
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.01110, 2022.
[18] O. Ram, Y. Levine, I. Dalmedigos, D. Muhlgay, A. Shashua, K. Leyton-Brown, and Y. Shoham,
     “In-context retrieval-augmented language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.00083, 2023.
[19] A. Glaese, N. McAleese, M. Tr˛ebacz, J. Aslanides, V. Firoiu, T. Ewalds, M. Rauh, L. Weidinger,
     M. Chadwick, P. Thacker et al., “Improving alignment of dialogue agents via targeted human
     judgements,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14375, 2022.
[20] J. Liang, W. Huang, F. Xia, P. Xu, K. Hausman, B. Ichter, P. Florence, and A. Zeng, “Code as
     policies: Language model programs for embodied control,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.07753,
     2022.
[21] D. Jurafsky and J. H. Martin, Speech and Language Processing, Jan 2023.
[22] T. Brown, B. Mann, N. Ryder, M. Subbiah, J. D. Kaplan, P. Dhariwal, A. Neelakantan, P. Shyam,
     G. Sastry, A. Askell et al., “Language models are few-shot learners,” Advances in neural
     information processing systems, vol. 33, pp. 1877–1901, 2020.
[23] V. Sanh, A. Webson, C. Raffel, S. H. Bach, L. Sutawika, Z. Alyafeai, A. Chaffin, A. Stiegler,
     T. L. Scao, A. Raja et al., “Multitask prompted training enables zero-shot task generalization,”
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.08207, 2021.
[24] M. Chen, J. Tworek, H. Jun, Q. Yuan, H. P. d. O. Pinto, J. Kaplan, H. Edwards, Y. Burda,
     N. Joseph, G. Brockman et al., “Evaluating large language models trained on code,” arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2107.03374, 2021.
[25] P. Lewis, E. Perez, A. Piktus, F. Petroni, V. Karpukhin, N. Goyal, H. Küttler, M. Lewis, W.-t.
     Yih, T. Rocktäschel et al., “Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks,”
     Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 33, pp. 9459–9474, 2020.


                                                 11
[26] G. Izacard, P. Lewis, M. Lomeli, L. Hosseini, F. Petroni, T. Schick, J. Dwivedi-Yu, A. Joulin,
     S. Riedel, and E. Grave, “Few-shot learning with retrieval augmented language models,” arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2208.03299, 2022.
[27] D. GmbH. (2023) Haystack documentation. [Online]. Available: https://docs.haystack.deepset.
     ai/docs/retriever#bm25-recommended
[28] H. W. Chung, L. Hou, S. Longpre, B. Zoph, Y. Tay, W. Fedus, E. Li, X. Wang, M. De-
     hghani, S. Brahma et al., “Scaling instruction-finetuned language models,” arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2210.11416, 2022.
[29] X. Puig, K. Ra, M. Boben, J. Li, T. Wang, S. Fidler, and A. Torralba, “Virtualhome: Simulating
     household activities via programs,” 2018.
[30] W. Huang, P. Abbeel, D. Pathak, and I. Mordatch, “Language models as zero-shot planners:
     Extracting actionable knowledge for embodied agents,” in International Conference on Machine
     Learning. PMLR, 2022, pp. 9118–9147.
[31] S. Yao, H. Chen, J. Yang, and K. Narasimhan, “Webshop: Towards scalable real-world web
     interaction with grounded language agents,” 2023.
[32] H. Touvron, T. Lavril, G. Izacard, X. Martinet, M.-A. Lachaux, T. Lacroix, B. Rozière, N. Goyal,
     E. Hambro, F. Azhar et al., “Llama: Open and efficient foundation language models,” arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.
[33] R. Li, L. B. Allal, Y. Zi, N. Muennighoff, D. Kocetkov, C. Mou, M. Marone, C. Akiki, J. Li,
     J. Chim et al., “Starcoder: may the source be with you!” arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.06161,
     2023.
[34] E. Nijkamp, B. Pang, H. Hayashi, L. Tu, H. Wang, Y. Zhou, S. Savarese, and C. Xiong,
     “Codegen: An open large language model for code with multi-turn program synthesis,” arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2203.13474, 2022.
[35] C. Lattner, M. Amini, U. Bondhugula, A. Cohen, A. Davis, J. Pienaar, R. Riddle, T. Shpeisman,
     N. Vasilache, and O. Zinenko, “Mlir: A compiler infrastructure for the end of moore’s law,”
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.11054, 2020.
[36] L. B. Allal, R. Li, D. Kocetkov, C. Mou, C. Akiki, C. M. Ferrandis, N. Muennighoff, M. Mishra,
     A. Gu, M. Dey et al., “Santacoder: don’t reach for the stars!” arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.03988,
     2023.
[37] S. Yang, O. Nachum, Y. Du, J. Wei, P. Abbeel, and D. Schuurmans, “Foundation models for
     decision making: Problems, methods, and opportunities,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.04129,
     2023.
[38] G. Mialon, R. Dessì, M. Lomeli, C. Nalmpantis, R. Pasunuru, R. Raileanu, B. Rozière, T. Schick,
     J. Dwivedi-Yu, A. Celikyilmaz et al., “Augmented language models: a survey,” arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2302.07842, 2023.
[39] S. Yao, J. Zhao, D. Yu, N. Du, I. Shafran, K. Narasimhan, and Y. Cao, “React: Synergizing
     reasoning and acting in language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03629, 2022.
[40] Y. Liang, C. Wu, T. Song, W. Wu, Y. Xia, Y. Liu, Y. Ou, S. Lu, L. Ji, S. Mao et al., “Taskmatrix.
     ai: Completing tasks by connecting foundation models with millions of apis,” arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2303.16434, 2023.
[41] K. Cobbe, V. Kosaraju, M. Bavarian, M. Chen, H. Jun, L. Kaiser, M. Plappert, J. Tworek,
     J. Hilton, R. Nakano et al., “Training verifiers to solve math word problems,” arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2110.14168, 2021.
[42] A. Parisi, Y. Zhao, and N. Fiedel, “Talm: Tool augmented language models,” arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2205.12255, 2022.
[43] M. Ahn, A. Brohan, N. Brown, Y. Chebotar, O. Cortes, B. David, C. Finn, K. Gopalakrishnan,
     K. Hausman, A. Herzog et al., “Do as i can, not as i say: Grounding language in robotic
     affordances,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.01691, 2022.
[44] I. Singh, V. Blukis, A. Mousavian, A. Goyal, D. Xu, J. Tremblay, D. Fox, J. Thomason, and
     A. Garg, “Progprompt: Generating situated robot task plans using large language models,” arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2209.11302, 2022.


                                                 12
[45] S. Vemprala, R. Bonatti, A. Bucker, and A. Kapoor, “Chatgpt for robotics: Design principles
     and model abilities,” 2023, 2023.
[46] R. Nakano, J. Hilton, S. Balaji, J. Wu, L. Ouyang, C. Kim, C. Hesse, S. Jain, V. Kosaraju,
     W. Saunders et al., “Webgpt: Browser-assisted question-answering with human feedback,” arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2112.09332, 2021.
[47] C. Wu, S. Yin, W. Qi, X. Wang, Z. Tang, and N. Duan, “Visual chatgpt: Talking, drawing and
     editing with visual foundation models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.04671, 2023.
[48] G. Kim, P. Baldi, and S. McAleer, “Language models can solve computer tasks,” arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2303.17491, 2023.
[49] A. Ratner, S. H. Bach, H. Ehrenberg, J. Fries, S. Wu, and C. Ré, “Snorkel: Rapid training
     data creation with weak supervision,” in Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment. International
     Conference on Very Large Data Bases, vol. 11, no. 3. NIH Public Access, 2017, p. 269.
[50] J. Liang, W. Huang, F. Xia, P. Xu, K. Hausman, B. Ichter, P. Florence, and A. Zeng, “Code as
     policies: Language model programs for embodied control,” 2023.
[51] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez, Ł. Kaiser, and
     I. Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,” Advances in neural information processing systems,
     vol. 30, 2017.
[52] N. Muennighoff, T. Wang, L. Sutawika, A. Roberts, S. Biderman, T. L. Scao, M. S. Bari, S. Shen,
     Z.-X. Yong, H. Schoelkopf et al., “Crosslingual generalization through multitask finetuning,”
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.01786, 2022.
[53] BigScience Workshop, “BLOOM (revision 4ab0472),” 2022. [Online]. Available: https:
     //huggingface.co/bigscience/bloom
[54] Chavez. (2023) chavinlo/gpt4-x-alpaca. [Online]. Available: https://huggingface.co/chavinlo/
     gpt4-x-alpaca
[55] R. Taori, I. Gulrajani, T. Zhang, Y. Dubois, X. Li, C. Guestrin, P. Liang, and T. B. Hashimoto,
     “Stanford alpaca: An instruction-following llama model,” https://github.com/tatsu-lab/stanford_
     alpaca, 2023.
[56] S. Iyer, X. V. Lin, R. Pasunuru, T. Mihaylov, D. Simig, P. Yu, K. Shuster, T. Wang, Q. Liu, P. S.
     Koura et al., “Opt-iml: Scaling language model instruction meta learning through the lens of
     generalization,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.12017, 2022.
[57] S. Zhang, S. Roller, N. Goyal, M. Artetxe, M. Chen, S. Chen, C. Dewan, M. Diab, X. Li,
     X. V. Lin et al., “Opt: Open pre-trained transformer language models,” arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2205.01068, 2022.
[58] A. Andonian, Q. Anthony, S. Biderman, S. Black, P. Gali, L. Gao, E. Hallahan, J. Levy-Kramer,
     C. Leahy, L. Nestler, K. Parker, M. Pieler, S. Purohit, T. Songz, W. Phil, and S. Weinbach,
     “GPT-NeoX: Large Scale Autoregressive Language Modeling in PyTorch,” 8 2021. [Online].
     Available: https://www.github.com/eleutherai/gpt-neox
[59] L. Gao, S. Biderman, S. Black, L. Golding, T. Hoppe, C. Foster, J. Phang, H. He, A. Thite,
     N. Nabeshima et al., “The pile: An 800gb dataset of diverse text for language modeling,” arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2101.00027, 2020.
[60] S. Black, S. Biderman, E. Hallahan, Q. Anthony, L. Gao, L. Golding, H. He, C. Leahy,
     K. McDonell, J. Phang et al., “Gpt-neox-20b: An open-source autoregressive language model,”
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06745, 2022.
[61] Together, LAION, and Ontocord.ai. (2023) The oig dataset. [Online]. Available:
     https://huggingface.co/datasets/laion/OIG
[62] S. Biderman, H. Schoelkopf, Q. Anthony, H. Bradley, K. O’Brien, E. Hallahan, M. A. Khan,
     S. Purohit, U. S. Prashanth, E. Raff et al., “Pythia: A suite for analyzing large language models
     across training and scaling,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.01373, 2023.
[63] Databricks, “dolly-v2-12b,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https://huggingface.co/databricks/
     dolly-v2-12b
[64] Stablility-AI. (2023) Stablelm. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/Stability-AI/StableLM


                                                 13
[65] C. Raffel, N. Shazeer, A. Roberts, K. Lee, S. Narang, M. Matena, Y. Zhou, W. Li, and P. J. Liu,
     “Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text transformer,” The Journal of
     Machine Learning Research, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 5485–5551, 2020.
[66] D. Koeplinger, M. Feldman, R. Prabhakar, Y. Zhang, S. Hadjis, R. Fiszel, T. Zhao, L. Nardi,
     A. Pedram, C. Kozyrakis et al., “Spatial: A language and compiler for application accelerators,”
     in Proceedings of the 39th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and
     Implementation, 2018, pp. 296–311.
[67] R. Prabhakar, Y. Zhang, D. Koeplinger, M. Feldman, T. Zhao, S. Hadjis, A. Pedram,
     C. Kozyrakis, and K. Olukotun, “Plasticine: A reconfigurable architecture for parallel pa-
     terns,” ACM SIGARCH Computer Architecture News, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 389–402, 2017.
[68] R. Prabhakar and S. Jairath, “Sambanova sn10 rdu: Accelerating software 2.0 with dataflow,” in
     2021 IEEE Hot Chips 33 Symposium (HCS). IEEE, 2021, pp. 1–37.
[69] J. Davis and M. Goadrich, “The relationship between precision-recall and roc curves,” in
     Proceedings of the 23rd international conference on Machine learning, 2006, pp. 233–240.
[70] J. Hauke and T. Kossowski, “Comparison of values of pearson’s and spearman’s correlation
     coefficients on the same sets of data,” Quaestiones geographicae, vol. 30, no. 2, pp. 87–93,
     2011.




                                                  14
In the appendix section, we provide detailed information on the following aspects of our study. In
Appendix A, we present the background and curation details for the 8 tasks included in ToolBench.
Appendix B focuses on the performance evaluation of an extensive suite of LLMs on ToolBench. In
Appendix C, we delve into the details of model alignment, including the process of generating the
training data and training details. We also provided the full spectrum of results for the experiments
in Section 6. Finally, in Appendix D, we introduce the API selection complexity score system, and
demonstrate its effectiveness and implication in measuring task complexity.

A        Benchmark Details
A.1       OpenWeather

This task involves using the REST API to interact with OpenWeather website7 . We include 9 types of
API calls that cater to 9 categories of queries, including but not limited to retrieving current weather
data in a city, obtaining air quality data at a specific longitude and latitude, and acquiring weather
forecast data for a location specified by a zip code. Making each type of API calls involves correctly
filling 2 to 3 required parameters (such as lon for longitude and lat for latitude) and 0 to 3 optional
parameters (such as lang for language and units for units of measurement), depending on the
requirements specified in each query. In total, we develop 100 unique queries for the 9 categories
and 2 demonstration examples for each category. To assess the quality of the LLM’s generation, we
look for the first line beginning with the word "curl", if it exists. We then execute this line using
the shell process. If the shell process returns a non-zero value, we declare "not executable" for this
generation. On the other hand, if the code can be executed, we compare the returned response with the
corresponding result from the ground-truth Curl request. The model’s generation will be considered
successful if the output matches the expected result precisely.

A.2       The Cat API

This task is a similar REST API task as the OpenWeather, but it involves making all the GET, DELETE,
or POST request to The Cat API website8 . There are 6 types of API calls for 6 types of queries,
including deleting a cat image from the user’s list of favorites, adding an image to the user’s list
of favorites, returning the list of favorite images, voting up or down to an image, and searching for
cat images with filtering requirements. We develop 100 queries for the test set and 2 demonstration
examples for each category. To evaluate the executability and success of the LLM’s generation in
these scenarios, we follow a similar procedure as that of the Open Weather task. It is worth noting that
for queries related to removing an image from the list of favorites, we compare the LLM’s generation
verbatim with the ground-truth label since duplicated deletion would inevitably lead to failure if
executed.

A.3       Home Search

This task is designed to replicate the process of searching for homes at a specific location based on
certain criteria. We design the API with 15 functions, including

          • set_location which sets the desired location;
          • set_but_or_rent which specifies whether the user is looking to buy or rent a home;
          • 12 functions for setting criteria, such as home prices, number of bedrooms, and home square
            footage;
          • search which submits the criteria to get search results.

We consider executability and f1 score of the generated action. To ensure executable searches,
the agent should make a sequence of function calls that starts with set_location and
set_buy_or_rent, followed by the criterion-setting functions, and then ends with a call to the
search function. If executable, an f1 score is computed between the criteria set by the generated
program and that by the ground-truth program. We develop a test set consisting of 100 queries that
    7
        https://openweathermap.org/api
    8
        https://thecatapi.com


                                                   15
asked for home options with varying criteria combinations and provide 10 demonstration examples.
To test the LLM’s ability to utilize unseen API functions, we intentionally exclude 3 criterion-setting
functions from all demonstration examples.

A.4    Trip Booking

The Trip Booking task is similar to the Home Search task but with more advanced dependency
requirements among function calls. It simulates the process of submitting search requests for
transportation tickets, hotel rooms, or both based on specific requirements like locations, dates, and
the number of tickets required. We design 20 functions for the three types of booking scenarios.
Depending on the scenario, some function calls may be required while others are optional. Missing
any required function call or mistake the order of some function calls results in a non-executable
search, while missing optional function calls lead to an unsuccessful search. We include 120 queries
in the test set and provide 11 demonstration examples.

A.5    Google Sheets

This task is to manipulate the real worksheets from the Google Sheets9 , via the gspread library10 . We
include 100 distinct API function calls from the gspread library, but we only create tests for the most
common use cases, including updating cell values, sorting, adding or deleting rows and columns,
merging cells, filtering, formatting and creating pivot tables. There are 70 test cases and 10 examples
in total. We also encourage the model to utilize Pandas DataFrame11 and gspread-dataframe12 for
advanced manipulations, by explicitly providing 8 additional API functions and certain examples for
them. The manipulation is considered as correct only if both the value and the format of each cell
match the expectation.

A.6    Virtual Home

This task is inherited from the setting of the VirtualHome13 simulator and asks the LLM to generate
sequences of actions for completing household activities. We develop API definitions, demonstration
examples, and a test set based on the list of available examples14 curated in [30]. The API consists of
40 functions, each of which corresponds to a specific action used in the examples. These functions
can take up to two arguments, and we collect the list of valid object names for each argument
based on all examples. Some examples of the functions include Sleep(), Push(object), and
PourInto(object1, object2).
The original example list contains 202 household activities, represented by 5088 examples, with each
example being a series of actions to complete a specific activity. However, some activities have exactly
the same solution as another activity. After deduplication, we are left with 183 unique activities with
non-overlapping solutions between any two activities. We randomly select 100 activities to form the
test set, while the remaining 83 tasks with their 512 solutions are used as demonstration examples.
When evaluating the LLM’s generation for a given task, we consider both executability and correctness.
The generation is considered executable if it can be correctly parsed into a series of valid actions,
where each action involves only recognizable objects. Regarding correctness, we measure the
similarity between the generated program and the ground-truth solution, using the longest common
subsequence (LCS) [29] normalized by the maximum length of the two. For tasks with multiple
solutions, we consider the highest LCS score from any solution.

A.7    WebShop

This is a multi-step task inherited from Webshop [31], a simulated online shopping environment. The
task requires an agent to navigate through a series of webpages to find and purchase a desired product
   9
     https://www.google.com/sheets/about/
  10
     https://docs.gspread.org/
  11
     https://pandas.pydata.org/docs/reference/api/pandas.DataFrame.html
  12
     https://gspread-dataframe.readthedocs.io/en/latest/
  13
     http://virtual-home.org/
  14
     https://github.com/huangwl18/language-planner/blob/main/src/available_examples.json


                                                   16
based on a text instruction that outlines the item description.The agent can perform two primary
types of actions: search[text], which involves entering a text query, and click[button] which
involves selecting a button on the page.
We generate demonstration examples based on this file15 , which contains trajectories collected
from humans performing the online shopping tasks. We formulate each trajectory into a series
of (instruction, webpage description, action) tuples in plain text format. The Long version of the
demonstration set consists of 1533 full trajectories, which often exceed the input sequence length
limit of the LLM. To address this issue, we provide a Short version of the demonstration examples,
by first removing 80% of the non-targeted items from any webpage description, and selecting only
the 200 shortest trajectories from the complete set.
For evaluation, we use the predefined simple mode of the WebShop environment16 and set up
the environment with the provided option of using only 1000 random products. We include 100
instructions from sessions with ID numbers 0 to 99 in the test set. We define success as making a
purchase which receives a positive reward from the environment within 25 steps.

A.8        Tabletop

This task is developed based on the simulated tabletop manipulation domain presented by [50] and
outlined in their Appendix K. In this simulation environment, a UR5e robot with a Robotiq 2F85 jaw
gripper can perform pick and place actions parameterized by 2D top-down positions. We reuse their
API definitions and prompts as demonstration examples. We iterate on the 14 instruction templates
used in their evaluation benchmark and create 15 types of tasks that involve manipulating up to 4
colored blocks and 4 colored bowls. For each type of task, we generate 7 valid initial setups of blocks
and bowls for the test set, ensuring that no collisions occur during the execution of a valid solution.
The success of the LLM’s generated program is determined by whether all objects are within a small
threshold of their target positions after execution.

B         Comprehensive Model Evaluation on the ToolBench
In this section, we want to compare the performance of different models on the ToolBench. Specifi-
cally, we selected 27 representative LLMs from both closed and open-source community, and evaluate
them on the ToolBench in 3-shot scenario.

B.1        Models

As listed in Table 8, we select a set of representative LLMs from both closed-source and open-source
community.
The closed models are the (Generative Pre-trained Transformer) GPT series from OpenAI, especially
the GPT-3[22] and its successors[13]. GPT-3 is a state-of-the-art language model developed by
OpenAI, with 175 billion parameters, making it the largest and most powerful language model ever
created. It is capable of performing a wide range of natural language processing tasks and has the
potential to revolutionize the way we interact with and understand language. Due to the lack of
detailed information about its training, we are motivated to study methods to build models achieving
similar capabilities, especially using open-source models.
We select the representative and the most advanced open-source models from recent years in our
work. They are all decoder-only models, based on transformers[51] architecture. Bloomz[52] is the
largest open-source LLM built upon the large-scale multilingual pretrained BLOOM[53]. Bloomz is
funtuned on xP3[52], a crosslingual task mixture, for crosslingual generalization to unseen tasks and
languages. StarCoder[33] is a family of models developed for purely code generation and synthesis
with 8K context length. They exhibit superior performance on common code generation benchmarks.
LLaMA[32] is a family of pretrained models, that are performant on quite a few NLP benchamrks.
Although they are not as large as Bloomz, they are all trained for almost 4 times longer than Bloom.
This is an important reason why they are able to outperform several top peer models on many NLP
tasks. Alpaca [54, 55] is fine-tuned LLaMA-13b model on 52K instruction-following data as well
    15
         https://github.com/princeton-nlp/WebShop/blob/master/baseline_models/data/il_trajs_finalized_images.zip
    16
         https://github.com/princeton-nlp/WebShop#text-environment-simple-mode


                                                        17
Table 8: The achitecture and training data of all the models in our evaluation. The models are grouped
by their architecture and training data.
                                Architecture                                  Data
          Model
                            Family Size Max SS # Tokens        Pretraining                  Finetuning
       Closed-source
      text-davinci-003       gpt3    175b    4096    -               -                           -
        gpt-3.5-turbo        gpt3      -     4096    -               -                           -
       text-curie-001        gpt3    6.7b    2048    -               -                           -
            gpt4             gpt4      -     8192    -               -                           -
       Open-source
         bloomz             bloom 176b       2048   366B       bloom corpus                     xP3
         llama-65b           llama   65b     2048   1.4T       CCNet, C4,                        -
         llama-30b           llama   30b     2048   1.4T    GitHub, Wikipedia,                   -
         llama-13b           llama   13b     2048   1.4T      Books, ArXiv,                      -
     llama-13b-alpaca        llama   13b     2048   1.4T     Stack Exchange           GPT-4 responses, Alpaca
       starcoderbase        bigcode 15.5b    8192   1T                                           -
                                                                The Stack
         starcoder          bigcode 15.5b    8192   1T                                   The Stack (Python)
         opt-30b              opt    30b     2048   300B                                         -
                                                           The Pile, BookCorpus,
         opt-1.3b             opt    1.3b    2048   300B                                         -
                                                            CC-Stories, Reddit,
       opt-iml-30b            opt    30b     2048   300B
                                                                CCNewsV2                  OPT-IML Bench
       opt-iml-1.3b           opt    1.3b    2048   300B
       gpt-neox-20b          neox    20b     2048   450B                                         -
 GPT-NeoXT-Chat-Base-20B     neox    20b     2048   460B                                  OpenChatKit IT
      codegen-16B-nl         neox    16b     2048   700B                                         -
     codegen-16B-multi       neox    16b     2048    1T                                     BigQuery
                                                                 The Pile
    codegen-16B-mono         neox    16b     2048    1T                                 BigQuery, BigPython
         pythia-12b          neox    12b     2048   300B                                         -
        dolly-v2-12b         neox    12b     2048   300B                                     Dolly IT
    pythia-6.9b/2.8b1.4b     neox    multi   2048   300B                                         -
   stablelm-base-alpha-7b    neox     7b     4096   800B                                          -
   stablelm-base-alpha-3b    neox     3b     4096   800B                                          -
                                                              The Pile (1.5T)
  stablelm-tuned-alpha-7b    neox     7b     4096   800B                                 Alpaca, GPT4All,
  stablelm-tuned-alpha-3b    neox     3b     4096   800B                             Anthropic, Dolly, ShareGPT



responses from GPT-4. OPT-IML[56] is the finetuned version of the original OPT[57], which is the
first family of large-scale (176 billion parameters) open-source models that are trained on publicly
available datasets. OPT-IML significatly improves the instruction following capability of OPT by
training on a large benchmark of 2000 NLP tasks for Instruction MetaLearning (IML). We only select
the publicly accessibile checkpoints from the OPT families in our work.
Another important family of models are all developed from the NeoX toolkit[58] and pretrained
using the PILE dataset[59]. GPT-NeoX-20B[60] is only pretrained on the PILE, while GPT-NeoXT-
Chat-Base-20B[7] is further finetuned on the OIG-43M[61], a dataset targetting better instruction
following capability. CodeGen family[34] is designed for superior capability on code generation, as
they are heavily finetuned on large code datasets. Pythia family[62] is a suite of models designed
for analyzing LLMs across training and scaling. They are all pretrained on the Pile in the same
way, but have different model sizes and intermediate checkpoints released during training. We use
those variants in our ablation study. Dolly[63] is finetuned beyond Pythia-12b on a new, high-quality
human generated instruction following dataset, crowdsourced among Databricks employees. The
StableLM family[64] is pre-trained on an experimental version of the PILE datasets which has 1.5
trillion tokens in total. The models have a sequence length of 4096 to push beyond the context
window limitations of the existing open-source language models. The instruction tuned counterpart
of each model is also released. By the time we publish this work, only 7b and 3b models are released,
while the team behind them is training larger models.
There are other notable models, such as FlanT5[28], the T0 family[23], and the T5 family[65], that
have shown promising performance. We do not include all of them in our baseline comparison, as
some of their features are not designed for the task at hand. For example, their tokenizers do not
distinguish between spaces, tabs and new lines, making it hard for them to generate executable code
based on API function calls.


                                                    18
Table 9: The performance on ToolBench of different models in 3-shot scenario. The models are group
by their architecture and training data.
                             Open The Cat Home  Trip Google                WebShop
            Task                                              VirtualHome            Tabletop
                            Weather API Search Booking Sheets             Long Short
   max tokens to generate     128   128    128   300    256        128       128       256
     num API function         all    all   all   all     10        10         all       0
        Closed-source
             gpt4            93.0     96.0    97.0        96.7   62.9   23.0 / 23.5         0.0         81.0
       text-davinci-003      99.0     98.0    97.0        89.2   62.9   31.0 / 25.1         0.0         66.7
         gpt-3.5-turbo       90.0     92.0    80.0        85.8   51.4   20.0 / 18.9   0.0         1.8   33.3
        text-curie-001        8.0     58.0     6.0         6.7    1.4    12.0 / 4.1   0.0         0.0    1.0
          Open-source
           llama-65b         90.0     80.0    84.0        65.8   32.9   32.0 / 20.3   0.0     41.2      30.5
           llama-30b         78.0     84.0    66.0        45.0   37.1   27.0 / 21.7   0.0     30.6      34.3
           llama-13b         70.0     74.0    45.0        35.8    5.7   28.0 / 18.9   0.0     27.6      17.1
       llama-13b-alpaca      62.0     43.0    44.0        40.8   11.4    1.0 / 1.6    0.0     2.7        9.5
          starcoder          91.0     84.0    82.0        51.7   48.0   23.0 / 19.4   2.6      0.0      21.9
        starcoderbase        90.0     86.0    79.0        63.3   42.9   24.0 / 16.3   5.8     23.1      17.1
        codegen-16B-nl       51.0     75.0    37.0        21.7    7.1   43.0 / 18.0   0.0         0.0   16.2
      codegen-16B-multi      56.0     75.0    47.0         7.5   21.4   31.0 / 14.1   0.0         0.5    8.6
      codegen-16B-mono       63.7     72.0    52.0        28.3   31.5   28.0 / 15.7   1.5         6.6   15.2
           bloomz            58.0     85.0    36.0        22.5   14.3    9.0 / 4.9    0.0         1.0   1.0
         opt-iml-30b         44.0     48.0     5.0        3.3    2.9    13.0 / 8.3    0.0         0.0   1.0
           opt-30b           46.0     35.0     2.0        3.3    8.6    24.0 / 11.7   0.0         0.0   1.0
         opt-iml-1.3b        20.0     28.0     0.0        0.0    4.3    13.0 / 3.1    0.0         0.0   1.0
           opt-1.3b          18.0     30.0     0.0        0.0    1.4     31.0 / 9.7   0.0         0.0   1.0
       neox-20b              55.0     69.0    27.0        10.8   18.6   28.0 / 15.3   0.0         8.8   6.7
GPT-NeoXT-Chat-Base-20B      43.0     73.0    28.0        10.8    4.3   26.0 / 13.1   0.0         0.7   7.6
         pythia-12b          53.0     65.0    12.0        0.8    11.4   17.0 / 12.1   0.0         0.0   1.9
        dolly-v2-12b          0.0      1.0    10.0        5.0     7.1   11.0 / 8.9    0.0         0.0   7.6
         pythia-12b          53.0     65.0    12.0        0.8    11.4   17.0 / 12.1   0.0         0.0   1.9
         pythia-6.9b         41.0     72.0    8.0         7.5     4.3   29.0 / 14.0   0.0         0.0   8.6
         pythia-2.8b         49.0     54.0    7.0         3.3    12.9   24.0 / 14.8   0.0         0.0   7.6
         pythia-1.4b         37.0     48.0    4.0         5.0    10.0   22.0 / 10.7   0.0         5.2   7.6
   stablelm-base-alpha-7b    22.0     47.0     0.0        0.0    4.3    28.0 / 10.3   0.0         0.0   2.9
  stablelm-tuned-alpha-7b    23.0     38.0     0.0        0.0    1.4    26.0 / 7.3    0.0         0.0   3.8
   stablelm-base-alpha-3b     6.0     28.0     0.0        0.0    1.4     29.0 / 5.3   0.0         0.0   1.0
  stablelm-tuned-alpha-3b    14.0     31.0     0.0        0.8    0.0     8.0 / 5.6    0.0         0.0   1.0



B.2    Evaluation

To collect the baseline results, we exploit the naive approach described in section 2 as the action
generator. We give each LLM sufficient max tokens to generate on each task and retrieve as many
API functions as possible in the prompt. The detailed information is listed in Table 9. We evaluate all
the models on a mixture of GPUs and RDUs[66, 67, 68]. In particular, the 176b-parameter bloomz
is evaluated on RDU, while all the other models are evaluated on NVIDIA A100 GPUs with 80GB
RAM.
For these models, We only conduct the few-shot evaluation described Section 6 because 1) zero-shot
results are not representative, as most of them are zero, 2) it is not practical to tune all the models on
our training data, and 3) few-shot results can be used as a great proxy of the model performance in all
the other settings. For the conversation-oriented models, including gpt-3.5-turbo, chavinlo/gpt4-x-
alpaca, GPT-NeoXT-Chat-Base-20B and dolly-v2-12b, we additionally add <human>: and <bot>:
key words in the prompt to better align with their training data format for better performance.
After we get the completion from the LLMs given a prompt, only minimal post-processing steps are
applied to the completion: 1) Properly truncate the completion, given the list of task-specific stop
sequences and 2) Replace the {API_KEY} keywords in the completion with the real API key, so as
to execute the code properly. Finally, as shown in Figure 1, to validate the action generated for the
single-step tasks, we execute the generated API calls and compare its output against the ground truth;
while for the multi-step tasks, the actions are used to interact with the environment directly and only


                                                     19
the final status is evaluated. For each task, we report the metrics described in Section 5 for each
task. Note that we only evaluate the top 1 generated action with sampling disabled. This is because,
in practice, action can only be executed once and there is no chance to reset things and try another
action.

B.3   ToolBench performance of different models

The performance of different models are summarized in Table 9. Below we show several observations.

Capability Gap Currently, the GPT family of models stands out as the leading players in the field,
and there is a significant gap between GPT-4, GPT-3.5 and all the other open-source models. While
open-source models may demonstrate competitiveness on some simpler tasks, they lag far behind on
more challenging tasks such as Google Sheets and Tabletop.

Instruction tuning on conventional NLP tasks doesn’t help Comparing the models between
chavinlo/gpt4-x-alpaca and LLaMA-13b, OPT-IML and OPT, StableLM-tuned and StableLM-base,
NeoX-Chat-Base-20b and NeoX, and dolly and pythia, the former model in each pair is intentionally
optimized to enhance instruction following capability compared to the latter model. However, no
significant accuracy improvement is observed on the ToolBench. Further, the LLaMA family, despite
not undergoing any specific instruction tuning during training, still achieves relatively good quality
compared to other public models.

Model size is important By comparing the performance of models from GPT faimily, LLaMA
family, OPT family, Pythia family and StableLM family, we can clearly see the trend that the larger
models tend to perform better on the ToolBench, given the same quantity and quality of their training
data.

Code generation is important StarCoder and CodeGen faimily stand out among other models
with similar sizes on ToolBench, while StarCoderBase is even on par with the llama-65b model
which is more than 4 times larger in size. CodeGen-16B-mono is overall better than its base model
CodeGen-16B-nl, which is not specifically tuned for code generation. It is also surprisingly better
than CodeGen-16B-multi on almost all the tasks, indicating that it is highly beneficial for action
generation if the model is heavily tuned on Python-style code generation.

C     Experiment Details
In this section, we extended Section 6 with more details about model training and results.

C.1   Training data

For the OpenWeather, The Cat API, Trip Booking, and Home Search tasks, we generate the train-
ing data by converting or expanding the demonstration examples of each task into templates and
populating them with various sets of variable values. For the remaining four tasks, we format the
training samples directly from the demonstration example set described in section 5. We exclude any
test samples from the training data and minimize the overlap of the API function call combinations
between any training and test samples. For example, we make sure that the API function combinations
used in each test case for the Home Search task are never present in the training data. However,
for the OpenWeather task, it was unavoidable to have some overlap because each test case only
involved a single function call and the training examples covered all the API functions. The numbers
of templates and training samples for each task are summarized in table 10. Example templates and
variable values are shown in table 11. The training sets for all tasks, except for the Google Sheets
and WebShop task, reduce the complexity score of their respective test sets when compared to the
example sets. As expected, the model’s accuracy shows improvement after fine-tuning.

C.2   All-shot loss

To construct the training samples, we concatenate API documents and multiple pairs of goal and API
calls as one input sequence to the LLMs. We use an all-shot loss formulation illustrated in Figure 6


                                                 20
                                      Table 10: The statistics of model alignment data
                           Open           The Cat     Home          Trip          Google
        Task                                                                                   VirtualHome           WebShop           Tabletop
                          Weather          API        Search       Booking        Sheets
    Templates                 90             40         100           30               1              1                   2                1
      Repeat                  20             45         18            60              118            512                 900              74
 Training samples            1800           1800       1800          1800             118            512                 1800             74
 Complexity score             1.1            1.0        6.4           10.1            12.1           12.3                  0.0            4.6




                                Table 11: Training template examples of different tools
                               Goal                                          Action                                     Variable values
                                                                                                          {city: "Palo Alto",
             What is the present weather situation   curl -X GET ’https://api.openweathermap.org/data/    city_formatted: "palo+alto",
   Open
             in {city}? Please respond in {lang}     2.5/weather?q={city_formatted}&appid=                lang: "English",
  Weather
             and use {units} units.                  {API_KEY}&lang={lang_abbr}&units={units}’            lang_abbr: "en",
                                                                                                          units: "imperial"}
  The Cat    Add the cat photo with id={image_id}    curl -X POST ’https://api.thecatapi.com/v1/favourites’
                                                                                                            {image_id: "MTUyNTA1OA"}
   API       to my list of favorites.                –data ’{"image_id":"{image_id}"}’
                                                    API.set_location({location})
                                                    API.set_buy_or_rent("buy")                            {location: "Palo Alto",
             Looking for homes for sale in
                                                    API.set_num_beds({num_beds})                          num_beds: 4,
  Home       {location} with {num_beds}
                                                    API.set_num_baths({num_baths})                        num_baths: 5,
  Search     bedrooms and {num_baths} bathrooms,
                                                    API.set_min_price({min_price})                        min_price: 7000000,
             between ${min_price} and ${max_price}.
                                                    API.set_max_price({max_price})                        max_price: 8000000}
                                                    API.search()
                                                     API.select_booking_type("trip tickets")
                                                     API.select_transportation({means_of_transportation}) {means_of_transportation: "flight",
             Search for {means_of_transportation}    API.set_num_adults({num_adults})                     max_price_ticket: 150,
   Trip      tickets for {num_adults} adults         API.set_origin(Loc({location_from}))                 num_adults: 2,
  Booking    from {location_from} to                 API.set_destination(Loc({location_to}))              location_from: "San Francisco",
             {location_to}, on {departure_date}.     date = Date({departure_date})                        location_to: "Los Angeles",
                                                     API.set_departure_date(date)                         departure_date: "2023-08-15"}
                                                     API.search()
                                                                                                          {task: "
                                                                                                          | Product | Cost | Price |
                                                                                                          | beef | 1 | 3 |
                                                                                                          | pork | 5 | 4 |
                                                                                                          | chicken | 10 | 11 |
                                                                                                          | lamb | 3 | 15 |
                                                                                                          | duck | 12 | 2 |
  Google
             {task}                                  {action}                                             | fish | 2 | 100 |
  Sheet
                                                                                                          Task:
                                                                                                          Sum B1:B4 and write the result below B4
                                                                                                          Action:",
                                                                                                          action: "
                                                                                                          worksheet.update(’B5’, ’=SUM(B1:B4)’,
                                                                                                          raw=False)"}
                                                                                                          {task: "
                                                                                                          Task: Read book
                                                                                                          Action:",
                                                                                                          action: "
VirtualHome {task}                                   {action}                                             Agent.Find(novel)
                                                                                                          Agent.Grab(novel)
                                                                                                          Agent.Find(chair)
                                                                                                          Agent.SitOn(chair)
                                                                                                          Agent.Read(novel)"}
                                                                                                          {task: "Instruction: i’m looking to
                                                                                                          buy a high resolution marine
                                                                                                          animal themed backdrop. the size
                                                                                                          should be 12x10ft, and price lower
                                                                                                          than 100.00 dollars
WebShop      {task}                                  {action}
                                                                                                          [button] Search [button_]
                                                                                                          Action:",
                                                                                                          action: "
                                                                                                          search[12x10ft high resolution
                                                                                                          marine animal backdrop]"}
                                                                                                          {task: "objects = [’yellow block’,
                                                                                                          ’green block’, ’yellow bowl’,
                                                                                                          ’blue block’, ’blue bowl’, ’green bowl’]
                                                                                                          # move the green block to the
                                                                                                          top right corner.",
  Tabletop   {task}                                  {action}
                                                                                                          action: "
                                                                                                          corner_pos = parse_position(
                                                                                                          ’top right corner’)
                                                                                                          put_first_on_second(
                                                                                                          ’green block’, corner_pos)"}




                                                                     21
Figure 6: We use all-shot loss for model alignment. We concatenate several examples into a single
training sample and backpropagate through the loss on the blue actions in every example. There is no
separator token between examples.
            Normal:        API Definition   Goal 1   API calls 1    Goal 2   API calls 2     ...   Goal N     API calls N
            All shot:      API Definition   Goal 1   API calls 1    Goal 2   API calls 2     ...   Goal N     API calls N




Table 12: The detailed performance on the ToolBench of models with different techniques applied.
Mean(standard deviation) values are provided for each task. There exists some inevitable randomness,
but it won’t cange the results by too much.
                                  Open The Cat Home    Trip   Google                                         WebShop
            Task                                                                      VirtualHome                             Tabletop
                                 Weather API   Search Booking Sheets                                       Long   Short
      Zero-shot Baseline
              gpt4               81.3(1.7) 97.4(0.3) 76.6(1.1) 91.5(0.5) 5.7(0.0) 40.8(0.6) / 8.0(0.2) 0.0(0.0)         -         -
          llama-30b              39.0(0.0) 49.0(0.0) 0.0(0.0) 0.0(0.0) 0.0(0.0) 78.0(0.0) / 0.3(0.0) 0.0(0.0)           -         -
           starcoder             32.0(0.0) 71.0(0.0) 7.0(0.0) 13.3(0.0) 5.9(1.1) 22.0(0.0) / 3.7(0.0) 0.0(0.0)          -         -
      codegen-16B-mono            7.0(0.0) 78.0(0.0) 0.0(0.0) 0.0(0.0) 1.4(0.0) 4.0(0.0) / 1.0(0.0) 0.0(0.0)            -         -
         Sys. Prompt
              gpt4               78.4(0.3) 94.2(0.8) 72.7(2.0) 89.6(0.9) 28.6(0.0) 42.8(0.6) / 8.6(0.1)   0.0(0.0)      -         -
          llama-30b              50.0(0.0) 88.0(0.0) 0.0(0.0) 0.0(0.0) 11.4(0.0) 24.0(0.0) / 2.5(0.0)     0.0(0.0)      -         -
           starcoder             71.0(0.0) 91.0(0.0) 2.0(0.0) 7.5(0.0) 15.9(0.2) 26.0(0.0) / 4.9(0.0)     0.0(0.0)      -         -
      codegen-16B-mono           32.0(0.0) 69.0(0.0) 0.0(0.0) 0.0(0.0) 7.1(0.0) 5.0(0.0) / 1.6(0.0)       0.0(0.0)      -         -
             3-shot
              gpt4               93.0(0.0) 96.0(0.0) 97.0(0.0) 96.7(0.0) 62.9(0.0) 23.0(0.0) / 23.5(0.0) 0.0(0.0) 0.0(0.0) 81.0(0.0)
          llama-30b              78.0(0.0) 84.0(0.0) 66.0(0.0) 45.0(0.0) 37.1(0.0) 27.0(0.0) / 21.7(0.0) 0.0(0.0) 30.6(0.0) 34.3(0.0)
           starcoder             91.0(0.0) 84.0(0.0) 82.0(0.0) 51.7(0.0) 48.0(1.1) 23.0(0.0) / 19.4(0.0) 2.6(0.0) 0.0(0.0) 21.9(0.0)
      codegen-16B-mono           63.7(0.5) 72.0(0.0) 52.0(0.0) 28.3(0.0) 31.5(0.5) 28.0(0.0) / 15.7(0.0) 1.5(0.0) 6.6(0.0) 15.2(0.0)
          Alignment
          llama-30b             100.0(0.0) 94.0(0.0) 85.0(0.0) 87.5(0.0) 4.3(0.0) 14.0(0.0) / 10.6(0.0) 20.8(0.0)       -         -
           starcoder             95.0(0.0) 98.0(0.0) 78.0(0.0) 85.0(0.0) 10.0(0.0) 28.0(0.0) / 13.4(0.0) 0.0(0.0)       -         -
      codegen-16B-mono           99.0(0.0) 95.8(0.6) 78.0(0.0) 73.3(0.0) 10.0(0.0) 10.0(0.0) / 11.5(0.0) 30.3(0.0)      -         -
    Sys. Prompt + 3-shot                                                                                                          -
              gpt4               99.0(0.0) 98.0(0.0) 98.0(0.0) 99.2(0.0) 68.6(0.0) 29.0(0.0) / 21.7(0.0) 0.0(0.0)    0.0(0.0) 83.8(0.0)
          llama-30b              66.0(0.0) 82.0(0.0) 63.0(0.0) 45.8(0.0) 27.1(0.0) 34.0(0.0) / 20.5(0.0) 0.0(0.0)    0.0(0.0) 34.6(0.2)
           starcoder             92.0(0.0) 91.0(0.0) 73.0(0.0) 54.2(0.0) 50.0(0.2) 28.0(0.0) / 15.0(0.0) 0.0(0.0)    0.0(0.0) 23.4(0.3)
     codegen-16B-mono            64.2(0.3) 70.0(0.0) 45.0(0.0) 22.5(0.0) 28.6(0.9) 27.0(0.0) / 15.7(0.0) 0.0(0.0)    0.0(0.0) 14.6(0.2)
  Sys. Prompt + Alignment
         llama-30b              100.0(0.0) 94.0(0.0) 79.0(0.0) 80.8(0.0) 5.7(0.0) 10.0(0.0) / 10.3(0.0) 0.6(0.0)        -         -
          starcoder              98.7(0.2) 97.0(0.0) 79.0(0.0) 84.2(0.0) 10.0(0.0) 18.0(0.0) / 10.3(0.0) 0.0(0.0)       -         -
     codegen-16B-mono            99.0(0.0) 96.0(0.0) 77.0(0.0) 75.8(0.0) 8.6(0.0) 7.0(0.0) / 10.0(0.0) 25.7(0.0)        -         -
      3-shot + Alignment
          llama-30b             100.0(0.0) 94.0(0.0) 88.0(0.0) 89.2(0.0) 4.3(0.0) 20.0(0.0) / 26.3(0.0) 19.5(0.0) 15.1(0.0) 6.9(0.2)
           starcoder            100.0(0.0) 96.0(0.0) 91.0(0.0) 84.2(0.0) 15.7(0.0) 48.0(0.0) / 21.3(0.0) 0.0(0.0) 0.0(0.0) 13.9(0.3)
      codegen-16B-mono           99.0(0.0) 97.9(0.2) 80.0(0.0) 77.5(0.0) 16.4(0.9) 38.0(0.0) / 18.6(0.0) 6.5(0.0) 17.5(0.0) 16.2(0.0)
Prompt + 3-shot + Alignment
         llama-30b          100.0(0.0) 94.0(0.0) 87.0(0.0) 85.8(0.0) 2.9(0.0) 16.0(0.0) / 24.3(0.0) 0.0(0.0) 0.0(0.0) 7.5(0.1)
          starcoder          99.0(0.0) 97.0(0.0) 83.0(0.0) 80.8(0.0) 21.2(0.3) 31.0(0.0) / 18.4(0.0) 0.0(0.0) 0.0(0.0) 13.9(0.3)
    codegen-16B-mono         97.7(0.2) 99.0(0.0) 82.0(0.0) 77.5(0.0) 19.8(0.3) 29.0(0.0) / 17.2(0.0) 0.0(0.0) 3.5(0.0) 16.2(0.0)




which learns to generate the API calls for every goal in a sequence. We use this loss formulation
because it empirically delivers better success rate, especially when using in-context demonstrations,
than the conventional loss which only backpropagates the loss associated with the API calls for the
last goal.


C.3     Training details

We finetune each model on the same dataset created with the method described in Section C.1 for 8
epochs. We use a max sequence length of 2048 without packing and mix the data from all the tasks
into a single dataset with random shuffling. In each sample, all the goal-action pairs are from the
same task. We report the validation accuracy on the best checkpoint. We use a batch size of 16 and a
constant learning rate of 1e − 5 for each model and train on an internal cluster of 4 A100 GPU’s,
each with 80GB RAM.


                                                                   22
C.4     Extended results for Section 6

We list out the detailed results of Section 6 in Table 12, where we report the model performance
on all the possible combinations of the three proposed techniques. The main observations are all
covered in Section 6. We run each job 3 times, and report the mean and standard deviation of the
main metrics. Their are some inevitable randomness happens in API or example retrieval, public API
services and the environment provided in Webshop and Tabletop. Even though randoness exists, we
observe that they barely change the final results. Thus, we only report the mean value everywhere
else in the paper.

D     API Selection Complexity Score
D.1     Complexity score

This section introduces a complexity score system designed to measure the intrinsic complexity and
difficulty of the tasks from ToolBench. The complexity score system aims to provide a quantitative
measure of the intrinsic complexity of the tests given the examples by calculating the probability of
the tests being derived or converted from the examples; and the derivation or conversion is performed
in a random system with all possible outcomes equally likely. This score serves to assess the inherent
level of difficulty involved in transitioning from one scenario to another, thereby assisting researchers
and developers in benchmark evaluation and analysis.

D.1.1    The likelihood of a test being derived from an example
In the complexity score system proposed herein, the calculation of the complexity score involves
assessing the probability or likelihood of the tests being derived from an example in the particular
task. Given a demonstration example e and a set of API functions D, the derivation of a particular
test sample t involves two major steps: 1) remove all the unused API calls while keeping all the
necessary ones and 2) insert the new API calls that e does not cover. Given a random system, where
all possible outcomes are equally likely, we suppose the deletion possibility of each API call from e
is 50%, while the insertion possibilities of the correct API call is 1/|D|, where |D| is the total number
of API functions of the given task. If t or e contains multiple calls to the same API function, we
consider them as different API calls, because they are usually not interchangeable. Based on these
assumptions, the likelihood of generating a test sample t is calculated using Equation (1).

                                                     |e|      |t\e|
                                                     1        1
                                    p(t | e, D) =                                                         (2)
                                                     2       |D|
where |e| represents the number of API calls in the example e, and |t \ e| is the number of uncovered
API calls in the test sample. Suppose we have a task that has 10 API functions in total {ai }10     1 , and
the demonstration example covers {a1 , a2 , a3 , a4 }, but the test sample requires {a1 , a2 , a6 , a4 , a5 }.
                                                                                                          4
In the first step, the probability of successfully dropping a3 while keeping the rest ones in e is 21 .
                                                                                     1 2
                                                                                      
Then, the probability of correctly adding in the uncovered ones, a5 and a6 , is 10        . Note that we
do not take the order of API calls into consideration for the purpose of being simple without losing
generosity.

D.1.2    The distance between a test and example pair
We first define the distance d between one particular test and example pair by take the logarithm of
the reciprocal of Equation (1) as:
                                                               
                                                         1
                                    d(t, e) = log                                                (3)
                                                    p(t | e, D)
The use of the reciprocal in the expression aligns the complexity score with the definition of complex-
ity, where a higher score indicates a greater level of complexity. Additionally, applying the logarithm
to the reciprocal value aids in addressing the magnitude gap. The logarithm function compresses the
range of values, reducing the impact of extreme values and creating a more manageable scale. This
normalization ensures that the complexity score is not disproportionately influenced by outliers or


                                                     23
extreme values, providing a more balanced representation of complexity across the range of input
values. By combining the reciprocal and logarithm, the expression effectively balances the score by
aligning it with the definition of complexity and mitigating the impact of magnitude differences in
the input values.

D.1.3      Complexity score of a task
Based on the complexity score of generating a test from an example, we can construct the complexity
score S of a given task. The score S = f (T , X , D) is a function of the test samples T , the
demonstration examples X and the API functions D of each task.

                         S(T , X , D) = Et∈T mine∈X d(t, e)
                                                                      
                                                               1
                                      = Et∈T mine∈X log
                                                          p(t | e, D)                                 (4)
                                                           "              |t\e| #
                                                                   |e|
                                                               1          1
                                      = −Et∈T maxe∈X log
                                                               2         |D|

This score ranges from zero to infinity. The larger the score is, the more challenging a task is in terms
of API selection. We calculate this score for both the original ToolBench (Table 4) and the training
data we created for alignment Table 10. They share the same D and T , but have a different X , so that
their API selection complexities are different for each task.

D.2      Complexity score on the ToolBench

In this section we demonstrate how the complexity score behaves on the ToolBench.

D.2.1      Computation details
For the Trip Booking, Home Search, Virtual Home, and Google Sheets tasks, the set of API functions
D is the same as described in appendix A. For the single-step, single-API-call tasks, Open Weather
and The Cat API, each valid URL with parameters is treated as a unique API option in set D. In
total, Open Weather has 37 API options, while The Cat API has 52 API options. In the case of the
Tabletop task, since there are no predefined correct answers for the test cases, we divide the three set
of "Tabletop Manipulation" examples17 into 65 single-step samples. Note that for the WebShop task,
since there are only two API functions always covered by the example set, the complexity score is 0
by definition.

D.2.2      Reversed-F1 Score
For comparison purpose, we also consider the simple Reversed-F1 (r-F1) distance dr−F 1 , derived
from the conventional F1 score[69], between one particular test and example pair as


                                       dr−F 1 (t, e) = (1 − F 1(t, e)) ∗ 100                          (5)
We multiply 100 to the score to align with the range of the complexity score defined above. Follow
the same definition proposed in appendix D.1.3, we can construct the r-F1 score Sr−F 1 of a given
task as:

                            Sr−F 1 (T , X ) = Et∈T mine∈X dr−F 1 (t, e)
                                                                                                      (6)
                                            = Et∈T mine∈X [(1 − F 1(t, e)) ∗ 100]

D.2.3      Measurements

  17
       https://code-as-policies.github.io/


                                                        24
Figure 7: Spearman’s correlation coefficient(SCC) is computed separately for two comparisons: (1)
complexity score and error rate, and (2) reversed F1 score and error rate on five tasks: (1) Open
Weather, (2) The Cat API, (3) Home Search, (4) Trip Booking, and (5) Virtual Home.




                                                 Table 13: Spearman’s Correlation Coefficients
In this section, Spearman’s Corre-
lation Coefficient (SCC) [70] is em-                      GPT-4 LLaMA CodeGen StarCoder
ployed to assess the effectiveness
                                          Complexity       0.2         1.0           1.0         0.7
of the proposed complexity score.
                                              r-F1         -0.3        0.7           0.7         0.3
The evaluation involves the anal-
ysis of five different tasks using
three models: GPT-4, LLaMA-30b,
CodeGen-16b, and StarCoder. We only include the five tasks without advanced reasoning from table 4,
as the advanced reasoning breaks the correlation between the API selection difficulty and the final
model performance. The complexity score and the r-F1 score are calculated for each task. SCC is
then computed separately for two comparisons: (1) complexity score and error rate, and (2) reversed
F1 score and error rate, for all five tasks. The results are illustrated in fig. 7 and table 13.
The findings of the study reveal near-perfect Spearman’s correlation coefficient (SCC) between
the complexity score and the error rate for the LLaMA-30b, CodeGen-16b and StarCoder models.
This strong correlation indicates that the proposed complexity score system accurately captures the
intrinsic difficulty of these tasks.
For more powerful models like GPT4, which exhibit near-perfect accuracy (above 93%) for low-
complexity tasks (complexity < 12) such as Open Weather, The Cat API, Home Search, and Trip
Booking, the SCC becomes relatively sensitive to any randomness or turbulence during the ex-
periments. Consequently, the complexity score system shows a non-perfect SCC of 0.2 in this
case.
Despite the sensitivity of the SCC in the GPT4 experiments, the complexity score remains a superior
indicator of task difficulty compared to the r-F1 score. It effectively captures the inherent difficulty
of each task and provides valuable insights into task complexity. Overall, complexity score is more
effective at capturing the inherent difficulty of each task, thus providing valuable insights into task
complexity.
The obtained results provide empirical evidence supporting the validity and reliability of the pro-
posed complexity score system. The high SCC values signify a consistent relationship between the
complexity score and the error rate across different models and tasks. This correlation strengthens
the argument that the complexity score accurately captures the complexity and difficulty of the
benchmarks, enabling researchers and developers to assess and compare the inherent challenges
associated with different tasks.




                                                  25
