                                        GDP VAL : E VALUATING AI M ODEL P ERFORMANCE
                                        ON R EAL -W ORLD E CONOMICALLY VALUABLE TASKS
                                             Tejal Patwardhan∗ Rachel Dias∗ Elizabeth Proehl∗ Grace Kim∗ Michele Wang∗
                                              Olivia Watkins∗ Simón Posada Fishman∗ Marwan Aljubeh∗ Phoebe Thacker∗
                                            Laurance Fauconnet Natalie S. Kim Patrick Chao Samuel Miserendino Gildas Chabot
                                                  David Li Michael Sharman Alexandra Barr Amelia Glaese Jerry Tworek
                                                                                 OpenAI



                                                                                        A BSTRACT




arXiv:2510.04374v1 [cs.LG] 5 Oct 2025
                                                     We introduce GDPval, a benchmark evaluating AI model capabilities on real-
                                                     world economically valuable tasks. GDPval covers the majority of U.S. Bureau
                                                     of Labor Statistics Work Activities for 44 occupations across the top 9 sectors
                                                     contributing to U.S. GDP (Gross Domestic Product). Tasks are constructed from
                                                     the representative work of industry professionals with an average of 14 years of
                                                     experience. We find that frontier model performance on GDPval is improving
                                                     roughly linearly over time, and that the current best frontier models are approach-
                                                     ing industry experts in deliverable quality. We analyze the potential for frontier
                                                     models, when paired with human oversight, to perform GDPval tasks cheaper and
                                                     faster than unaided experts. We also demonstrate that increased reasoning effort,
                                                     increased task context, and increased scaffolding improves model performance on
                                                     GDPval. Finally, we open-source a gold subset of 220 tasks and provide a pub-
                                                     lic automated grading service at evals.openai.com to facilitate future research in
                                                     understanding real-world model capabilities.


                                        1       I NTRODUCTION
                                        There is growing debate about how increasingly capable AI models could affect the labor market—
                                        whether by automating specific tasks, replacing entire occupations, or creating entirely new kinds
                                        of work (Brynjolfsson et al., 2025; Chen et al., 2025). Current approaches to measure the economic
                                        impact of AI focus on indicators such as adoption rates, usage patterns, and GDP growth attributed
                                        to AI (Chatterji et al., 2025; Tamkin et al., 2024; Appel et al., 2025; Acemoglu, 2025; Bick et al.,
                                        2024). However, historical evidence from technological shifts—such as electricity, airplanes, and
                                        computers—shows that the transition from invention to economy-wide permeation often takes years
                                        or even decades, requiring regulatory, cultural, and procedural changes (David, 1990; Brynjolfsson
                                        & Hitt, 2000; Brynjolfsson et al., 2017; Dwivedi et al., 2021; Solow, 1987). Therefore, while infor-
                                        mative when available, these methods are lagging indicators of AI impacts. We consider an alternate
                                        method for understanding the potential economic impacts of AI: directly measuring AI model ca-
                                        pabilities. AI capability evaluations can provide clearer, more directly attributable evidence about
                                        model abilities, allowing us to assess economic relevance ahead of widespread adoption.
                                        Our paper introduces the first version of GDPval, a benchmark evaluating AI model performance
                                        on real-world economically valuable tasks. GDPval covers the top 9 sectors contributing to U.S.
                                        GDP (Gross Domestic Product), with at least 30 tasks per occupation in the full set (and 5 tasks per
                                        occupation in the gold subset), across 44 occupations. Each task is constructed based on actual work
                                        product created by an expert professional. Given the complexity of automatically grading these
                                        tasks, our primary evaluation metric is head-to-head human expert comparison. We also provide
                                        an experimental automated grader service for the 220 open-sourced gold subset of tasks. Future
                                        GDPval iterations will incorporate greater breadth, realism, interactivity, and contextual nuance.
                                        The initial version of GDPval offers several advantages over existing AI model evaluations:
                                                  • Realism: Unlike AI benchmarks in the style of an academic test that focus on reasoning
                                                    difficulty (e.g., Phan et al. (2025); Hendrycks et al. (2020); Rein et al. (2023); Liu et al.
                                            ∗
                                                Equal contribution. Correspondence to tejal@openai.com.


                                                                                               1
                           Figure 1: Example GDPval tasks from full set


         (2023)), tasks are based on actual work product from industry experts, validated through
         multiple rounds and review, and tied to time and cost required for completion.
       • Representative breadth: Unlike AI evaluations focused on specific domains like soft-
         ware engineering (e.g., Miserendino et al. (2025)), the GDPval full set covers 1,320 tasks
         across 44 occupations, sourced to cover the majority of Work Activities tracked by O*NET
         for each occupation U.S. Department of Labor, Employment and Training Administration
         (2024). This top-down approach allows for representativeness of tasks across occupations.
         We also build on production AI usage analyses (e.g., Tamkin et al. (2024); Chatterji et al.
         (2025); Appel et al. (2025)) to cover areas where model adoption is still emerging.
       • Computer use and multi-modality: Tasks require manipulating a variety of formats (e.g.,
         CAD design files, photos, video, audio, social media posts, diagrams, slide decks, spread-
         sheets, and customer support conversations). Each task also requires parsing through up to
         17 reference files in the gold subset, and 38 in the full set.
       • Subjectivity: In addition to correctness, expert graders often consider subjective factors
         such as structure, style, format, aesthetics, and relevance. Our dataset also therefore serves
         as a helpful testbed to assess automated grader performance.
       • No “upper limit”: Unlike metrics that could saturate quickly, our primary metric is win
         rate, which allows for continuous evaluation. Currently, we compare model outputs against
         a human expert baseline, but we could replace our baseline with increasingly strong models
         over time and keep evaluating.
       • Long-horizon difficulty: Tasks require an average of 7 hours of work for an expert pro-
         fessional to complete. On the high end, tasks span up to multiple weeks of work.


2     TASK C REATION

We first identify the sectors that contribute most to U.S. GDP, then source tasks drawn from the
highest-earning knowledge work occupations within those sectors.

2.1   P RIORITIZING OCCUPATIONS

GDPval covers tasks from 9 sectors and 44 occupations that collectively earn $3T annually. We
detail below the methodology behind our initial version.
To choose the initial occupations, we:

      1. Selected sectors that contribute over 5% to US GDP as determined by Q2 2024 Value
         Added by Industry as a Percentage of Gross Domestic Product (see Federal Reserve Bank
         of St. Louis (2025)). These 9 sectors are shown in Table 1.


                                                  2
      2. Selected the 5 occupations 1 within each sector that contribute most to total wages
         and compensation and are predominantly digital. We took a task-based approach to
         determining if an occupation should be classified as “predominantly digital.” Specifically,
         we identified all tasks for an occupation from O*NET, a database of occupational data,
         definitions and tasks from the U.S. Department of Labor. Similar to Eloundou et al. (2023),
         we prompted GPT-4o to classify each task as digital or non-digital, and then classified the
         overall occupation as digital if at least 60% of its component tasks were digital. To calcu-
         late this percentage, we weighted tasks by the “relevance,” “importance,” and “frequency”
         scores for each task reported in O*NET Task Ratings.

We further validated the representativeness of our digital tasks measure by benchmarking it against
the Acemoglu & Autor (2011) task content framework. The correlations we observe—digital
tasks increasing with non-routine cognitive content and decreasing with routine and manual con-
tent—demonstrate alignment with established economic measures of work, as per section A.7.1.
For wage and occupation data, we used O*NET’s May 2024 national employment and wage esti-
mates to calculate total wages for 831 occupations (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (2025b)) and
further detailed in section A.7.




                  Figure 2: GDPval includes real-world work from 44 occupations.


2.2   E XPERT R ECRUITMENT

We recruited expert industry professionals to create realistic tasks based on their professional work
experience. Experts were required to have a minimum of 4 years of professional experience in their
occupation and a strong resume with a demonstrated history of professional recognition, promo-
tion, and management responsibilities. The average expert had 14 years of experience. We further
required experts to pass a video interview, a background check, a training and a quiz to partici-
pate in the project. Experts were well compensated for their time and experience. Some of the
prior employers of our industry experts include: Accenture, Aetna, Apple, AXA Advisors, Bank
of America, Barclays, BBC News, Boeing, Budget Rent a Car, Capital One, Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, Citigroup, Condé Nast, CVS Pharmacy, U.S. Department of Defense, Dis-
ney, Douglas Elliman, E*TRADE, Federal Trade Commission, General Electric, Goldman Sachs,
Google, Guggenheim Partners, HBO, IBM, JPMorgan Chase, Johnson & Johnson, Kmart, Kirk-
    1
      We assigned occupations to sectors by using the 2023 BLS National Employment Matrix from U.S. Bureau
of Labor Statistics (2025a) to map occupations to sectors by identifying the sector with the highest employment
for each occupation. For more detail, see section A.7.


                                                      3
land & Ellis LLP, LinkedIn, Lockheed Martin, Macy’s, Massachusetts General Hospital, Meta, Mi-
crosoft, Morgan Stanley, National Park Service, NFL Network, Oracle, Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Whar-
ton & Garrison LLP, Prudential, PwC, Raytheon, Sally Beauty, Samsung, SAP, Scientific American,
Sotheby’s, Telegraph Media Group, Thermo Fisher Scientific, TIME, Twilio, U.S. Department of
Justice, United States Air Force, United States Postal Service, Walgreens, Wells Fargo, White &
Case LLP, and Whole Foods.

2.3   TASK C REATION

Each GDPval task consists of two primary components: a request (often with reference files) and
a deliverable (work product). Experts classified their requests against O*NET occupational tasks
for their occupation to ensure broad and representative coverage across tasks (U.S. Bureau of Labor
Statistics, 2025a). More details on task characteristics can be found in section A.4. To assess task
quality, we asked occupational experts to rate each task on its difficulty, representativeness, time to
complete, and overall quality against real-world standards for their occupation. Each task’s dollar
value was estimated by multiplying the average estimated completion time by median hourly wages
for the corresponding occupation from OEWS data (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2025b).

2.4   TASK Q UALITY C ONTROL P IPELINE




         Figure 3: Tasks undergo multiple rounds of review to ensure realism and quality.
All 1,320 tasks in the full GDPval set went through an iterative review pipeline involving both
automated model-based screening and multiple stages of human expert review. Each task received
an average of five human reviews (with a minimum of three reviews).
Across all stages of review, experts provided detailed comments, and tasks were iteratively revised
before subsequent reviews to enhance quality and representativeness, as detailed in section A.5.

2.5   H UMAN E XPERT G RADING AND AUTOMATED G RADING

To grade the 220 open-sourced gold subset, we conducted blinded expert pairwise comparisons,
where experts in the relevant occupation were presented with a request and reference files and asked
to rank two or more unlabeled work deliverables.
On average, grading each comparison for the gold subset took over an hour. Additional occupational
experts were sourced to grade human and model deliverables. Experts provided detailed justifica-
tions for their choices and rankings, which enabled us to compute our headline win rates for various
models compared to the human expert completion.
For the gold subset, we trained an experimental grading model to perform pairwise comparisons
in the style of industry professional experts. Although limited, the automated grader is faster and
cheaper than expert grading, and achieves 66% agreement with human expert graders, only 5%
below human expert inter-rating agreement of 71%. Further detail is in section A.6.


                                                  4
             (a) Pairwise Grading Setup                               (b) Agreement with Humans

Figure 4: GDPval uses pairwise expert comparisons for grading. We also create an experimental
automated grader. We find that automated grader agreement is within 5% of human inter-rater
agreement on the GDPval gold subset.


3     E XPERIMENTS AND R ESULTS
3.1   H EADLINE RESULTS




Figure 5: On human pairwise comparisons, models are beginning to approach parity with industry
experts on the GDPval gold subset.

We evaluated GPT-4o, o4-mini, o3, GPT-5, Claude Opus 4.1, Gemini 2.5 Pro, and Grok 4 using blind
pairwise comparisons by professional industry experts 2 . Claude Opus 4.1 was the best performing
model on the GDPval gold subset, excelling in particular on aesthetics (e.g., document formatting,
    2
      We aimed to keep comparisons as blind as possible, but model samples may still have been identifi-
able due to stylistic differences. OpenAI outputs often used em dashes, Claude outputs frequently adopted
first-person phrasing, and Grok occasionally referred to itself as Grok. Although filenames were scrubbed
of model identifiers, to preserve sample identity, we did not alter style or content, so experts may still have
been able to infer model origins. We sampled Claude via the UI to enable the maximum GDPval-relevant
features. For example, for Claude, we wanted to evaluate its ‘Upgraded file creation and analysis’ feature


                                                      5
Figure 6: Performance of OpenAI frontier models increased roughly linearly over time on the GDP-
val gold subset.


slide layout), while GPT-5 excelled in particular on accuracy (e.g., carefully following instructions,
performing correct calculations) as per fig. 8. This distinction is also shown in section A.2.4, where
GPT-5 performs better on pure text, while Claude performs better on file types like .pdf, .xslx, and
.ppt, demonstrating better visual and aesthetic abilities 3 . In fig. 5, on the GDPval gold subset, 47.6%
of deliverables by Claude Opus 4.1 were graded as better than (wins) or as good as (ties) the human
deliverable. Model deliverables outperformed or matched expert humans’ deliverables in just over
half the tasks.

3.2   S PEED AND COST COMPARISON

We analyzed several scenarios to understand the potential speed and cost savings ratio of frontier
models on the GDPval gold subset tasks in section A.2.14 . In the scenarios analyzed, incorporating
frontier AI models into expert workflows showed the potential to save time and money relative to
unaided experts. Fig 7 summarizes expected savings under a “try using the model and if still unsat-
isfactory, fix it yourself” setup. Here, an expert human samples from a model, reviews outputs, and
if unsatisfactory, resamples and repeats. If no satisfactory output is obtained, the human completes
the task themselves. Under this setup, as well as other setups (e.g., directly using model outputs,
trying the model just once before doing work directly), model assistance can potentially save the
expert time and money.




(https://www.anthropic.com/news/create-files). For the OpenAI models, we enabled the web search tool and
the code interpreter tool, with background sampling. We also preinstalled several libraries not available in the
base image, see section A.6.4. For plots shown, we sampled each model 3 times for each prompt, and then had
3 different human graders grade each sample (yielding 9 comparisons per prompt, per model, across 220 tasks).
    3
      We caveat also that the occupations and task types covered by text tend to be different than those that
involve multi-modal
    4
      We were not able to obtain cost estimates for Claude, Gemini, and Grok.


                                                       6
Figure 7: In the scenarios we analyze, models show the potential to save time and money by coupling
AI assistance with expert human oversight. Here, we show speed and cost savings from a “try n
times, and if still unsatisfactory, fix it yourself” approach as detailed in section A.2.1.


3.3   M ODEL STRENGTHS AND WEAKNESSES

We built a clustering pipeline to analyze why experts preferred or rejected GPT-5 high, Claude Opus
4.1, Gemini 2.5 Pro, and Grok 4 deliverables as shown in fig. 8.5 Claude, Grok, and Gemini most
often lost due to instruction-following failures, while GPT-5 high lost mainly from formatting errors
and had the fewest instruction-following issues. Gemini and Grok frequently promised but failed to
provide deliverables, ignored reference data, or used the wrong format. GPT-5 and Grok showed the
fewest accuracy errors, though all models sometimes hallucinated data or miscalculated.

3.4   I NCREASING REASONING EFFORT AND SCAFFOLDING

To understand the impact of reasoning effort on model performance, we ran GDPval on the o3 and
GPT-5 models at low, medium, and high reasoning effort. We found that additional reasoning effort
improved performance.
We were also interested in measuring how easily we could improve model capabilities with prompts.
For example, many of the observed GPT-5 failure modes were due to obvious formatting errors.
We created a prompt which encouraged GPT-5 to rigorously check deliverables for correctness,
check layouts by rendering files as images, avoid nonstandard unicode characters, and avoid excess
verbosity. The prompt applies generally to multimodal economic tasks and is not overfit to any given
question (see section A.3 for details). We also improved agent scaffolding by enabling GET requests
in the container and performing best-of-N sampling with N=4 and a GPT-5 judge.
Prompting fully eliminated black-square artifacts from GPT-5 responses, which previously affected
over half of generated PDFs, and reduced egregious formatting errors in PowerPoint files from
86% to 64%. This can be partially attributed to a sharp increase in agents using their multi-modal
capabilities to inspect deliverables (15% → 97%). Prompting also improved human preference win
rates by 5 percentage points in Figure 9b. These easy performance gains suggest there are paths to
agent improvement on GDPval tasks by training or scaffolding them to be more thorough and take
full advantage of their multimodal capabilities.
    5
      Samples were clustered using expert justifications; labels were mutually exclusive and left blank when the
rationale was unclear.


                                                       7
Figure 8: Across models, experts most often preferred the human deliverable because models failed
to fully follow instructions on GDPval tasks.




         (a) Reasoning effort experiment                        (b) Prompt tuning experiment

Figure 9: Model performance improves predictably with increasing reasoning effort. Prompt-tuning
and scaffolding improvements also increase GPT-5 performance.




4   O PEN - SOURCING

We open-source the prompts and reference files in our 220-task gold subset. While human expert
comparison is still our recommended method of grading, we make an experimental automated grader
publicly available at evals.openai.com. Please note that the tasks in the open sourced set have been
scrubbed of information that could be used to identify the expert who wrote the task. We also
note that, as a result of limitations with our automated grader, we don’t provide automated grading
results for all tasks in the gold subset. Further disclaimers about the open source gold subset are in
section A.1.3.


                                                  8
5    L IMITATIONS
Dataset size: The GDPval full set currently consists of only 44 occupations and 30 total tasks
per occupation. It is therefore a limited, initial cut of knowledge work tasks, not a comprehensive
evaluation of all possible occupational tasks. We are expanding the dataset size.

Focus on self-contained knowledge work: Tasks in the initial version of GDPval are oriented
around knowledge work that can be performed on a computer, particularly around digital deliver-
ables. Manual labor and physical tasks are not included in the current version. Moreover, tasks that
involve extensive tacit knowledge, access to personally identifiable information, use of proprietary
software tools, or communication between individuals are out of scope for the current evaluation.
We aim to build on this in future versions of the evaluation.

Tasks are precisely-specified and one-shot, not interactive: For GDPval, we provide the full
context of the task in the prompt, but in real life it often takes effort to figure out the full context of a
task and understand what to work on. We are working on improvements to GDPval that involve more
interactivity and contextual realism. In the meantime, the experiment in the “Under-contextualized
GDPval” section (section A.2.7) demonstrates how model performance degrades with less context.

Grader performance: Our current automated grader has a number of limitations compared to
human expert graders. More details about the automated grader are available in the section A.6.2.

Cost: Constructing and running our evaluation is expensive, particularly with industry expert
graders. For this reason, we make an automated grader proxy available, but do not consider it a
full substitute for industry expert graders.

6    C ONCLUSION
In GDPval, we contribute the following:

      1. Dataset: We create a new evaluation dataset (GDPval) measuring real-world, economically
         valuable tasks.
      2. Capability benchmarking: We analyze quality, speed and cost of deliverables across hu-
         man industry experts and frontier AI models.
      3. Experiments: We test how results shift with differing reasoning effort, prompting, scaf-
         folding, and context.
      4. Open-sourcing: We open-source 220 tasks as part of our gold subset which includes
         prompts and reference files.
      5. Automated grader: We release an automated grader to improve accessibility of grading at
         evals.openai.com.

We hope this work contributes to the science of tracking model progress, so that we have better data
to assess the social impacts of AI models.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Abhishek Bhardwaj, Addea Gupta, AJ Ostrow, Aleksander Madry, Alexander Wei, Ally
Bennett, Becky Waite, Ben Gaffney, Brad Lightcap, Casey Chu, Cassandra Duchan Solis, Char-
lotte Cole, Dane Stuckey, Eric Wallace, Erik Ritter, Evan Mays, Fidji Simo, Gideon Myles, Han-
nah Wong, Isa Fulford, Jakub Pachocki, James Lennon, Jared Pochtar, Jason Kwon, Jordan Frand,
Julie Steele, Justin Wang, Kai Chen, Karthik Rangarajan, Kevin Liu, Larry Summers, Leo Liu,
Leon Maksin, Leyton Ho, Lindsay McCallum, Livvy Pierce, Manoli Liodakis, Mark Chen, Max
Schwarzer, Miles Palley, Miles Wang, Nakul Khanna, Nat McAleese, Natalie Kim, Nicholas Car-
lini, Nick Otis, Nick Ryder, Noam Brown, Noel Bundick, Paul Radulovic, Phillip Guo, Prashanth R,
Rachel Brown, Raoul de Liedekerke, Robert Rotsted, Ronnie Chatterji, Ryan Kaufman, Ryan Rot-
sted, Sam Altman, Sam Bowman, Sherwin Wu, Tom Cunningham, Tom Stasi, Tony Song, Trevor


                                                     9
Creech, Wenda Zhou, Wenlei Xie, Wyatt Thompson, and Yara Khakbaz for discussion, assistance,
and review. We are also grateful to our vendor partners for their collaboration and support through-
out this research, and extend a special thank you to the industry experts who contributed their time
and expertise to GDPval, without whom this work would not have been possible.


R EFERENCES
Daron Acemoglu. The simple macroeconomics of ai. Economic Policy, 40(121):13–58, 2025.

Daron Acemoglu and David Autor. Skills, tasks and technologies: Implications for employment and
  earnings. In Handbook of labor economics, volume 4, pp. 1043–1171. Elsevier, 2011.

Ruth Appel, Peter McCrory, Alex Tamkin, Michael Stern, Miles McCain, and Tyler Neylon. An-
  thropic economic index report: Uneven geographic and enterprise ai adoption. Anthropic Re-
  search, 2025. URL https://www.anthropic.com/research/anthropic-econo
  mic-index-september-2025-report.

Alexander Bick, Adam Blandin, and David J Deming. The rapid adoption of generative ai. Technical
  report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2024.

Erik Brynjolfsson and Lorin M. Hitt. Beyond computation: Information technology, organizational
  transformation and business performance. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 14(4):23–48, 2000.
  doi: 10.1257/jep.14.4.23. URL https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257
  /jep.14.4.23.

Erik Brynjolfsson, Daniel Rock, and Chad Syverson. Artificial intelligence and the modern produc-
  tivity paradox: A clash of expectations and statistics. Working Paper 24001, National Bureau of
  Economic Research, November 2017. URL http://www.nber.org/papers/w24001.

Erik Brynjolfsson, Danielle Li, and Lindsey Raymond. Generative ai at work. The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 140(2):889–942, 2025.

Aaron Chatterji, Thomas Cunningham, David J Deming, Zoe Hitzig, Christopher Ong, Carl Yan
  Shan, and Kevin Wadman. How people use chatgpt. Working Paper 34255, National Bureau of
  Economic Research, September 2025. URL http://www.nber.org/papers/w34255.

Wilbur Xinyuan Chen, Suraj Srinivasan, and Saleh Zakerinia. Displacement or complementarity?:
 The labor market impact of generative ai. Harvard Business School, 2025.

Paul A. David. The dynamo and the computer: An historical perspective on the modern productivity
  paradox. American Economic Review, 80(2):355–361, 1990. URL https://econpapers.r
  epec.org/RePEc:aea:aecrev:v:80:y:1990:i:2:p:355-61.

Yogesh K Dwivedi, Laurie Hughes, Elvira Ismagilova, Gert Aarts, Crispin Coombs, Tom Crick,
  Yanqing Duan, Rohita Dwivedi, John Edwards, Aled Eirug, et al. Artificial intelligence (ai):
  Multidisciplinary perspectives on emerging challenges, opportunities, and agenda for research,
  practice and policy. International journal of information management, 57:101994, 2021.

Tyna Eloundou, Sam Manning, Pamela Mishkin, and Daniel Rock. Gpts are gpts: An early look at
  the labor market impact potential of large language models, 2023. URL https://arxiv.or
  g/abs/2303.10130.

Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. Value added by industry as a percentage of gross domestic
  product. FRED Release Tables, 2025. URL https://fred.stlouisfed.org/releas
  e/tables?rid=331&eid=211. Accessed: 2025-09-03.

Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andy Zou, Mantas Mazeika, Dawn Song, and
  Jacob Steinhardt. Measuring massive multitask language understanding. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2009.03300, 2020. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2009.03300. URL https://arxiv.or
  g/abs/2009.03300.


                                                10
Xiao Liu, Hao Yu, Hanchen Zhang, Yifan Xu, Xuanyu Lei, Hanyu Lai, Yu Gu, Hangliang Ding,
  Kaiwen Men, Kejuan Yang, Shudan Zhang, Xiang Deng, Aohan Zeng, Zhengxiao Du, Chenhui
  Zhang, Sheng Shen, Tianjun Zhang, Yu Su, Huan Sun, Minlie Huang, Yuxiao Dong, and Jie
  Tang. Agentbench: Evaluating llms as agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.03688, 2023. doi:
  10.48550/arXiv.2308.03688.

Samuel Miserendino, Michele Wang, Tejal Patwardhan, and Johannes Heidecke. Swe-lancer: Can
  frontier LLMs earn $1 million from real-world freelance software engineering? arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2502.12115, 2025.

Arjun Panickssery, Samuel R. Bowman, and Shi Feng. Llm evaluators recognize and favor their
  own generations, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.13076.

Long Phan et al. Humanity’s last exam. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.14249, 2025.

David Rein, Betty Li Hou, Asa Cooper Stickland, Jackson Petty, Richard Yuanzhe Pang, Julien
  Dirani, Julian Michael, and Samuel R. Bowman. GPQA: A graduate-level google-proof q&a
  benchmark. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.12022, 2023. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2311.12022. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.12022.

Robert M. Solow. We’d better watch out. New York Times Book Review, pp. 36, July 1987. URL
  https://www.standupeconomist.com/pdf/misc/solow-computer-product
  ivity.pdf.

Alex Tamkin, Miles McCain, Kunal Handa, Esin Durmus, Liane Lovitt, Ankur Rathi, Saffron
  Huang, Alfred Mountfield, Jerry Hong, Stuart Ritchie, Michael Stern, Brian Clarke, Landon
  Goldberg, Theodore R. Sumers, Jared Mueller, William McEachen, Wes Mitchell, Shan Carter,
  Jack Clark, Jared Kaplan, and Deep Ganguli. Clio: Privacy-preserving insights into real-world
  ai use. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.13678, 2024. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2412.13678. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.13678.

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. Occupational outlook – occupational data. https://www.bls.
  gov/emp/data/occupational-data.htm, 2025a. Accessed: 2025-09-03.

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. Occupational employment and wage statistics: May 2024 national
  tables. https://www.bls.gov/oes/tables.htm, 2025b. Data reference May 2024;
  accessed: 2025-09-03.

U.S. Department of Labor, Employment and Training Administration. Work activities - onet 28.3
  data dictionary. https://www.onetcenter.org/dictionary/28.3/excel/tas
  k_ratings.html, 2024. Accessed: 2025-04-20.


A     A PPENDIX

A.1     D ISCLOSURES

A.1.1    AI DISCLOSURE
We used AI models to help with our literature review and with tweaking language in the paper. We
also used AI coding assistants as part of our regular engineering workflows (e.g., to help find and fix
bugs).

A.1.2    S ENSITIVE CONTENT AND POLITICAL CONTENT DISCLOSURE
Some tasks in GDPval include NSFW content, including themes such as sex, alcohol, vulgar lan-
guage, and political content. We chose to keep these tasks as they reflect real themes addressed in
various occupations (e.g., film, literature, law, politics). We do not endorse the particular actions or
views in any of the content.


                                                  11
A.1.3    T HIRD - PARTY REFERENCES DISCLOSURE
GDPval contains limited references to third-party brands and trademarks solely for research and
evaluation purposes. No affiliation or endorsement is intended or implied. All trademarks are the
property of their respective owners. Some images and videos in this dataset feature AI-generated
individuals and real people who have provided permission. Names and identifying references to
private individuals in GDPval are fictitious. Any resemblance to actual persons or entities is purely
coincidental.

A.2     A DDITIONAL D ETAIL ON E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

A.2.1    S PEED AND C OST A NALYSIS , CONTINUED
We use the following definitions:

      1. Human expert professional completion time HT is the time taken by a human expert profes-
         sional to complete a task, based on validated self-reported time to complete6 . To calculate
         human expert professional completion cost HC , we multiplied the reported task completion
         hours per occupation by the median hourly wage for each occupation from the U.S. Bureau
         of Labor Statistics (2025b)7 . On average, on our 220 gold subset HT = 404 minutes and
         HC = $361.
      2. Human expert professional review time RT is an estimate of the time taken to assess a
         model deliverable by a human expert grader. We observe this from our task monitoring
         software, averaging the time taken to grade for the first time each human expert was asked
         to grade that question. On average, RT = 109 minutes, and associated human expert
         professional review cost RC is on average $86, where RC is again calculated based on
         time taken multiplied by median wage data.
      3. Model completion time MT is the time taken for the model to complete a deliverable and
         MC is the associated completion cost, based on empirical API speed and cost for the model
         to complete the deliverable when given a prompt 8 .
      4. Model win rate w is how often the model deliverable is rated better than the human deliv-
         erable by the human expert grader.

We then calculate the following ratios:

      1. Naive ratio: To measure the ratio of human deliverable versus model deliverable, without
         accounting for any quality differences or implementation times, we simply divide the aver-
         age task completion time for a human by the average sampling time for a model: HT /MT ,
         and analogously for cost: HC /MC .
      2. Try 1 time, then fix it ratio: To calculate the time with this method, we take the sampling
         time for the model, add review time RT for an expert to assess quality, and then with
         probability (1 − wi ) add in the human completion time for any fixes needed for that model
         for a task i , to obtain T1,i and analogously C1,i :
                                      E[T1,i ] = MT,i + RT,i + (1 − wi )HT,i                                (1)
                                      E[C1,i ] = MC,i + RC,i + (1 − wi )HC,i                                (2)
          The average time spent is T1 = E[T1,i ], marginalizing over all tasks i, similarly with C1 .
          This proxies the setup where a human tries using GPT-5 for a task, assesses its quality, and
          then does the task themselves if the deliverable quality is below their quality bar. Our plug-
          in estimate of the time savings ratio is: HT /(MT + RT + (1 − w)HT ) = HT /T̂1 , where
          we use the empirical mean T̂1 . The analogous cost ratio is HC /(MC + RC + (1 − w)HC ).
     6
       During submission, experts self-reported the real-world time required to complete each task. Multiple oc-
cupational reviewers independently validated these times, correcting errors. Because times were self-reported,
it is possible that experts under-estimated or over-estimated time taken
     7
       Because our experts were recruited specifically for being highly experienced in their field, these wage
estimates likely underestimate their true market cost.
     8
       For each task, we collected three API completions per model and averaged the observed response times
recorded in the API metadata. We also recorded the average invoiced cost per task.


                                                      12
      3. Try n times, then fix it ratio: To calculate the time with this method, we take the sampling
         time for the model, add review time RT for an expert to assess quality, and then add in the
         human completion time for any fixes needed for that model (based on 1 − wi ) 9 . We repeat
         this across n resamples and re-assess steps before the human steps in to fix it:

                                      n
                                      X
                                            (1 − wi ) k−1 (MT,i + RT,i ) + (1 − wi ) n HT,i
                                                                        
                         E[Tn,i ] =                                                                          (3)
                                      k=1
                                                1 − (1 − wi )n
                                  = (MT,i + RT,i )             + (1 − wi )n HT,i                             (4)
                                                      wi
                                   n
                                   X
                                     (1 − wi ) k−1 (MC,i + RC,i ) + (1 − wi ) n HC,i
                                                                 
                        E[Cn,i ] =                                                                           (5)
                                      k=1
                                                       1 − (1 − wi )n
                                  = (MC,i + RC,i )                    + (1 − wi )n HC,i                      (6)
                                                             wi
          This proxies the setup where a human tries n rounds of using GPT-5 for a task, then assesses
          its quality each time, and then does the task themselves if the model quality is below their
          quality bar after all attempts. As before, the average time spent is Tn = E[Tn,i ], marginal-
          izing over all tasks i, similarly with Cn . Therefore, as n → ∞, with w > 0, the time
          savings are HT /((MT + RT )/w) times faster and cost savings are HC /((MC + RC )/w)
          times cheaper than human experts.

               Table 2: Speed and cost improvements under different review strategies.

                                            Speed improvement           Cost improvement
                Model       Win rate Naive Try 1x Try nx Naive Try 1x Try nx
                gpt-4o        12.5%      327x     0.87x     0.46x 5172x        0.90x     0.53x
                o4-mini       29.1%      186x     1.02x     1.06x 1265x        1.06x     1.22x
                o3            35.2%      161x     1.08x     1.28x 480x         1.13x     1.47x
                gpt-5         39.0%       90x     1.12x     1.39x 474x         1.18x     1.63x

When incorporating time to review and redo work, the payoff from using a model shrinks. We do
not include consideration of the time taken to review a human professional deliverable, although
this would commonly occur for tasks in GDPval (either self-review of the professional’s own work
or review by a supervisor of a team member’s work). We also do not include the possibility that
the human deliverable is also undesirable. One further limitation of this analysis is that it does
not capture the cost of catastrophic mistakes, which can be disproportionately expensive in some
domains.




    9
      We are over-penalizing the model here, because the win rate after each completion likely goes up (because
the professional will adjust the prompt to the model to fix the errors) and the review time also goes down as the
professional gets more comfortable with the task.


                                                       13
A.2.2   W IN RATES BY SECTOR
We provide a sector-level breakdown of win rates in fig. 10. Results differ across industries. Some
sectors have low win rates for all models, while in others (e.g., Government, Retail Trade, and
Wholesale Trade), the strongest models approach parity on GDPval tasks.




                                  Figure 10: Win rate by sector




                                                14
A.2.3   W IN RATES BY OCCUPATION
We provide a detailed breakdown of win rates by occupation in fig. 11. Results vary: some occu-
pations show consistently low win rates across all models, while others display near parity among
multiple models.




                               Figure 11: Win rate by occupation




                                               15
A.2.4    W IN RATES BY DELIVERABLE
We report win rates by deliverable type in fig. 12. Performance varies across formats, with Claude
achieving the best results for all deliverables except pure text. GPT-5 high leads for pure text outputs,
though overall win rates remain low.




                             Figure 12: Win rate by deliverable file type


A.2.5    W IN RATES BY TIME TO COMPLETE
We report win rates by task duration in fig. 13. Win rates are highest for shorter tasks (0–2 hours)
and decline steadily as completion time increases. This indicates that models perform best on faster,
less time-intensive tasks.




                            Figure 13: Win rate by time to complete task


A.2.6    A DDITIONAL DETAIL ON MODEL FAILURES ANALYSIS
We took the subset of GPT-5 model failures (tasks where the GPT-5 deliverable lost to the human
expert), and then we asked other expert occupational graders to rate these subset samples as:
      1. Catastrophic: The model completion would be catastrophic if used in real life because it
         is harmful or dangerously wrong (e.g., insulting a customer, giving the wrong diagnosis,
         recommending fraud, or suggesting actions that will cause physical harm).
      2. Bad: The completion was bad and not fit for use, but not offensive or dangerous (e.g.,
         rambling nonsense, completely irrelevant, or incoherent answers).
      3. Acceptable but subpar: The completion was acceptable (and could be used) but the hu-
         man produced a stronger response (e.g., model response lacked helpful detail compared to
         the human).
      4. N/A: Disagree with original expert grader; the model completion was better than the human
         completion.


                                                   16
        Figure 14: Experts rated GPT-5 model failures by categorized by severity of failure.

The most common categorization of a GPT-5 model failure was “acceptable but subpar.” Another
roughly 29% of ratings were for bad or catastrophic (with roughly 3% of failures marked as catas-
trophic). The 23% of ratings for “model better” roughly corresponds to the level of inter-rater
agreement we observed in fig. 4b.

A.2.7   U NDER - CONTEXTUALIZED GDP VAL
To assess how models handle task ambiguity, we created a modified version of GDPval with de-
liberately lower-context prompts. These shorter prompts omitted additional context such as where
to locate specific data within reference files, how to approach the problem, or detailed formatting
expectations for the final deliverable; the models had to “figure it out.” On average, these revised
prompts were 42% the length (by token count) of the original prompts.
This setting helped measure an aspect of professional knowledge work previously unaddressed in
our evaluation: navigating ambiguity by figuring out what to work on and where to get the necessary
inputs. We collected and graded GPT-5 completions with expert human graders and found the
model’s performance was worse on under-specified prompts. In particular, the models struggled to
figure out context.
As a note: this experiment was run on an earlier version of the GDPval gold subset, and therefore
the observed win rates do not match those in the main text of the paper.




Figure 15: On the underspecified version of GDPval, GPT-5 performed worse as it struggled to
figure out requisite context.


                                                17
A.3   A DDITIONAL D ETAIL ON P ROMPT-T UNING

Here is the prompt we give the agent to elicit capabilities (lightly edited to remove some specific
details of our scaffolding setup).

   Prompt

   Special characters - Never use the character - (U+2011), since it will render poorly on some people’s
   computers. Instead, always use - (U+002D) instead. - Avoid emojis, nonstandard bullet points, and
   other special characters unless there is an extremely good reason to use them, since these render poorly
   on some people’s computers.
   Graphics embedded within PDFs/slides - Make sure that any diagrams or plots are large enough to
   be legible (though not so large that they are ugly or cut off). In most cases they should be at least
   half the page width. - Plots and charts to visualize data are good. Simple graphics (like a flowchart
   with arrows) are good. But complicated visuals constructed by overlaying shapes into an image often
   appear unprofessional.
   PDFs - Always use LibreOffice to create the PDF (it must be LibreOffice! If LibreOffice is not in-
   stalled, you can install it yourself). Other libraries sometimes show weird artifacts on some computers.
   Fonts - Always use fonts which are available across all platforms. We recommend Noto Sans / Noto
   Serif unless there is an extremely good reason to use something else. If you must use another font,
   embed the font in the pptx/word/etc doc.
   Deliverable text - Do not link to submitted files in the deliverable text (links are not supported on the
   interface where these will be viewed). - Ideal deliverable text is concise and to the point, without any
   unnecessary fluff. 4 sentences max. - Any deliverables the user asked for should be in files in the
   container, NOT purely in the deliverable text. - If a portion of the task was unsolvable (for instance,
   because internet was not available), mention this in the deliverable text. - Your submission should be
   complete and self-contained. Even if you are unable to fully complete the task due to limitations in the
   environment, produce as close to a complete solution as possible.
   Verbosity Always be clear and comprehensive, but avoid extra verbosity when possible.
   Filetypes If the prompt does not request a specific filetype, use ”standard” filetypes like PDF, PPTX,
   DOCX, XLSX, MP4, ZIP, etc.
   Video files (mp4, mov) Extract a string of images from the video files and check the images to see
   whether the visual elements are corrupted.
   Mandatory formatting checks Before you submit your deliverable, you MUST perform the following
   mandatory formatting checks. Take your time, do these thoroughly, they are extremely important!
   STEP 1: Convert all visual deliverables to PNGs using LibreOffice. This includes pptx, docx, pdf,
   xlsx, etc. Convert it so that each page or slide is a separate PNG. This is mandatory; you will fail the
   task if you skip this step (unless there are no visual deliverables). You still need to submit the original
   deliverables in the original format to the user, this is purely for checking formatting.
   STEP 2: Display the PNGs. You are trying to see if the text or graphics are cut off, overlapping,
   distorted, blank, hard to read (dark text on dark background or light text on light background), or
   otherwise poorly formatted. Look at each image thoroughly, zoom in if you need to see more closely.
   Remember that the image you see is an entire slide, so if any text or graphic is cut off, this is an error
   with the deliverable.
   STEP 3: Programmatic formatting checks. For highly visual submissions (e.g. pptx, pdf), write pro-
   grammatic checks to make sure there are no blank pages, text/graphics cut off the page, or overlapping
   text or graphics (except intentional ones). Also check that if there is a page or slide limit, it is respected.
   STEP 4: Summarize the prompt’s deliverable instructions, and match that to the portion of the deliv-
   erable that addresses it.
   STEP 5: Right before submitting, check that the deliverables you have produced are exactly what
   you want to submit: deliverables should contain exactly the files you want to submit, with no extra
   files. Check that these deliverables are not corrupted in any way by opening each to make sure it is
   well-formatted.
   If any of these checks reveal a formatting issue, fix them and go through steps 1-5 again. Take your
   time, be thorough, remember you can zoom in on details.
   This is IMPORTANT and MANDATORY, go through each step one-by-one meticulously! Every
   formatting error is a MAJOR ISSUE THAT YOU NEED TO FIX! There is no time limit, be thorough,
   go slide by slide or page by page.
   Finally – on the last line of your output text, add CONFIDENCE[XX], where XX is an integer between
   0 and 100, inclusive, indicating your confidence that the submission is correct, follows instructions,
   and is well-formatted.

We performed best-of-N sampling by prompting a GPT-5 grader with the prompt, reference files,
and deliverable files for four different submissions, then asking it to pick the best.


                                                        18
A.4     A DDITIONAL TASK C HARACTERISTICS

                     Table 3: Summary statistics for GDPval gold subset tasks

                                Mean         Std        Min    25%        50%      75%        Max
 Overall quality (1–5)         4.47    0.32   3.18   4.30    4.50    4.70      5.00
 Difficulty (1–5)              3.32    0.95   1.00   3.00    3.00    4.00      5.00
 Representativeness (1–5)      4.50    0.74   2.00   4.00    5.00    5.00      5.00
 Avg time to complete (hrs)    9.49   13.75   0.50   2.38    5.00   10.00    100.00
 Dollar value of task       $398.46 $599.45 $12.59 $93.72 $174.81 $386.03 $4,114.20

                       Table 4: Summary statistics for GDPval full set tasks

                               Mean           Std       Min    25%        50%      75%         Max
Overall quality (1–5)         4.55      0.43 2.00    4.33    4.56    5.00       5.00
Difficulty (1–5)              3.20      0.92 1.00    3.00    3.00    4.00       5.00
Representativeness (1–5)      4.43      0.76 1.00    4.00    5.00    5.00       5.00
Avg time to complete (hrs)    8.63     24.70 0.25    2.00    4.00    8.00     605.00
Dollar value of task       $391.44 $1,296.67 $8.53 $70.70 $147.31 $354.12 $32,028.70

A.4.1    F ILES AND ATTACHMENTS

Many traditional evaluations rely on text-in/text-out task formats. GDPval tasks incorporate a broad
range of real-world file types (such as spreadsheets, documents, presentations, images, audio, video,
and specialized formats like CAD). 67.7% of tasks required interaction with at least one reference
file.
                            Table 5: File counts for GDPval gold set tasks

                                     Mean   Std Min 25% 50% 75%                 Max
                 Reference files      1.92 3.47 0.00        0.00   1.00   2.00 38.00
                 Deliverable files    1.54 2.64 0.00        1.00   1.00   1.00 36.00



A.4.2    O*NET TASKS , S KILLS , AND W ORK ACTIVITIES

To ensure broad occupational representativeness, we analyzed the O*NET tasks, skills, and general
work activities represented by GDPval tasks. The dataset covered 208 unique O*NET tasks, 25
occupational skills, and 26 work activities.
Most GDPval tasks involve multiple O*NET tasks, skills, and work activities.
              Table 6: O*NET Tasks, Skills, and Work Activities coverage in gold set

                               Total unique in O*NET Total in gold subset Coverage (%)
      O*NET Skills                                     35                     25          71.4%
      O*NET Work Activities                            41                     26          63.4%
      O*NET Tasks                                   1,470                    208         14.15%


                                                   19
A.4.3    TASK SPECIFICATION

Occupational experts conducting human grading rated the specificity of instructions provided in each
prompt. 89.07% of tasks were rated as well-specified, indicating the instructions closely matched
real-world expectations of clarity and detail.
                                  Table 7: Task specification scores

                              Label             %, gold set%, full set
                              Underspecified         8.28%      8.41%
                              Well-specified        89.07%     89.34%
                              Overspecified          2.66%      2.26%


A.4.4    TASK R EPRESENTATIVENESS
Professional Services Qualification: Technology and intellectual property attorney with partner
  roles at multiple AmLaw 100 firms in New York and California, and 15+ years of experience
  advising clients on emerging technologies, advertising, antitrust, and cross-border disputes and
  transactions.
  Quote: Legal tasks included details that felt true to practice, like ambiguous fact patterns, disclo-
  sure of relevant legal considerations along with non-legal business goals, and realistic reference
  documents.
Healthcare Qualification: Nursing professional with 18+ years of expertise in emergency
  medicine, renal management, care coordination, and healthcare operations. Skilled in quality
  assurance, case management, and professional education.
  Quote: These tasks captured the complexity of the role, requiring not only a keen ear for the
  physician’s words, but also careful attention to clinical accuracy and professional formatting.
Retail Trade Qualification: Strategic retail executive with 15 years of experience growing prestige
  and niche beauty brands through national account leadership, $1B+ P&L ownership, and data-
  driven omnichannel strategies.
  Quote: These tasks mirrored the work I performed regularly, including developing revenue fore-
  casts, conducting competitive analysis, building executive-level presentations, and driving strate-
  gic initiatives for key retail partners within a global organization.
Finance Qualification: Fintech and Wall Street leader with 20+ years of experience in wealth man-
   agement, asset management, and capital markets across global institutions and startups.
   Quote: They reflected real-world scenarios that were nuanced and individualized, situations that
   only someone with years of experience in the field would fully comprehend. The language and
   details used in the tasks were directly drawn from actual industry practice, making them authentic
   and grounded in real-world application.
Wholesale Trade Qualification: National Accounts Sales Manager for US, China, and Sweden
 based brands/factories with over 25 years of experience selling to US based retailers.
 Quote: All the tasks were in fact based upon real world tasks with back-up reference files and
 real-world data.
Manufacturing Qualification: Lead Industrial Engineer with 5+ years of experience managing
  large-scale projects and leading teams of 10+ engineers in industrial operations.
  Quote: The redesign tasks stood out as especially true to real-world practice because they in-
  cluded specific design components and blocks, along with detailed drawings that incorporated
  precise measurements. They emphasized practical considerations such as visibility and optimiz-
  ing walking distances to improve overall productivity, exactly the kind of detail-oriented focus
  that reflects actual engineering and operational priorities.
Government Qualification: Executive leader with 15+ years working at strategic and operational
  levels in government and non-profit sectors in housing, human service and labor market pro-
  grams.
  Quote: Many of the tasks demand the integration of multiple sources of information, nuanced
  decision-making, and tailored the work to varied audiences we serve in the workplace.


                                                  20
Real Estate and Leasing Qualification: Seasoned commercial real estate broker with 10 years of
   experience in investment sales, leasing, and managing real estate offices and agents.
   Quote: The tasks capture the dynamics and expertise unique to specific sectors and settings.
Information Qualification: An experienced senior journalist and content leader with over 20 years
   in top-tier media, global corporations, and high-growth startups.
   Quote: Most importantly, the tasks are anchored in real-world challenges and workplace goals.
   They push past obstacles, achieve workplace goals, and deliver real-world solutions and products.

Additional Detail about Expert Qualifications Less than 10% of applicants were selected to con-
tribute tasks to our full set. The industry experts also brought occupational diversity, representing
different company sizes, locations, and sub-specialties. Each occupation had a minimum of 5 quali-
fied professionals.
Experts for each occupation were required to have previous experience in that specific occupation
and sector based on the O*NET occupation definitions (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2025a).

A.5     F URTHER D ETAIL ON TASK Q UALITY C ONTROL

A.5.1    M ODEL - IN - THE - LOOP TASK R EVIEW
We used OpenAI models to automatically screen each task submission across a variety of criteria
and flag possible errors or omissions including: ensuring the task is relevant to the selected O*NET
occupation, verifying the request involved tasks performed primarily on a computer, flagging if the
task complexity was too simple (e.g., if the task seemed like 5 minutes of work instead of a longer-
term piece of work), and indicating if there were no deliverable and reference files attached.
Because models can make mistakes, experts were instructed to take model feedback as a suggestion
rather than a direction. Experts retained final responsibility for task accuracy and completeness; the
model did not autonomously alter tasks.

A.5.2    H UMAN E XPERT R EVIEWERS
Human reviewers conducted multiple rounds of review on each task. Reviewers were primarily
sourced from the original expert pool based on demonstrated excellence in task creation. Initially,
our researchers manually reviewed all tasks to identify experts who produced consistently high-
quality tasks; these individuals were trained and promoted to reviewers. The most skilled reviewers
were further trained to become lead reviewers, responsible for identifying, mentoring, and promoting
additional qualified reviewers from within the expert pool. Throughout the review process, the
research team regularly performed quality-control checks on tasks signed off by reviewers, ensuring
ongoing alignment and quality standards.

A.5.3    I TERATIVE REVIEW PROCESS
The iterative review process included at least the following 3 stages:

      1. Generalist initial review: A generalist reviewer confirmed the task adhered to project
         requirements.
      2. Occupation-specific expert review: An occupation-specific reviewer assessed the repre-
         sentativeness of the task for the occupation, and confirmed that the task was possible for
         another member of the occupation to complete with the provided context.
      3. Final iterative reviewer feedback loop: A third expert reviewer provided iterative feed-
         back and worked with experts until the task met our rigorous quality standards.

A.6     AUTOMATED G RADER D ETAILS

A.6.1    AUTOMATED G RADER C ONSENSUS M ETRICS
To measure automated grader performance, we measured the agreement rate between scores given
by the automated grader vs. human expert graders for the same sample. We also compared grading
agreement between human experts who had graded the same sample.


                                                 21
Human-automated grader Agreement. For a given sample s, let the human score H and au-
tomated grader score A take values in {0, 0.5, 1}, where 1 indicates preference for the model de-
liverable, 0 indicates preference for the human deliverable, and 0.5 indicates a tie. The agreement
between human and automated grader is defined as
                                      AHA
                                                            
                                        s   = E 1 − |H − A| .

The model-level human–automated grader agreement is the mean of AHA
                                                                 s  over all samples for that
model.

Human Inter-Rater Agreement. For a given sample s, let the human scores H1 and H2 take
values in p ∈ {0, 0.5, 1}. We measure human inter-rater agreement as the following expectation
over two randomly sampled human ratings
                                 AHH
                                                         
                                   s  = E 1 − |H1 − H2 | .

For a given sample, we estimate this quantity by the empirical mean over all pairs of ratings for that
sample. The final human inter-rater agreement for a model is the mean of these sample-level scores
over all samples with at least two human graders. Existing grader inter-reliability statistics such as
Cohen’s kappa, Fleiss’ kappa, and Krippendorff’s alpha are less directly applicable here, since our
graders output ordinal scores in {0, 0.5, 1}.

A.6.2     AUTOMATED G RADER C ORRELATION R ESULTS
Over three automated grader sweeps on our dataset10 , average human-automated grader agreement
was 65.7% and human inter-rater agreement was 70.8%. Plots below show 95% confidence intervals
obtained by bootstrapping (resampling with replacement the available automated grader scores or
human grades for each sample, computing the mean per sample, and averaging across all samples
or for the specified model).
Our automated grader, based on GPT-5-high, shows lower correlation with human expert graders
when assessing outputs from capable OpenAI models. This aligns with empirical evidence that
models often favor their own responses Panickssery et al. (2024). Both agreement metrics are highest
for less capable models, since their outputs are easier to distinguish from human deliverables and
are less likely to be preferred.




Figure 16: Average human-automated grader agreement is most closely aligned with human inter-
rater agreement for non-OpenAI models. Both agreement metrics are highest for less capable mod-
els, as they can be more frequently distinguished from human deliverables and are less likely to be
chosen.

A.6.3     AUTOMATED G RADER L IMITATIONS
In the open-source set we mark 12 out of 220 tasks as ungradable due to limitations of the automated
grader.
   10
      Metrics were calculated over all samples where the automated grader did not encounter systems errors
and returned a valid score. We also excluded 12 tasks (out of the 220 in our open-sourced eval set) that the
automated grader frequently could not grade or was less likely to grade reliably due to its limitations, described
later.


                                                       22
     1. Internet Access: Tasks which strictly require internet (e.g., tasks that ask agents to find
        music online and download it) are not possible to grade because the grader does not have
        internet access.
     2. Python: The automated grader operates in a container that only allows for running Python.
        Because of this, we excluded 3 Software Developers tasks that require running other lan-
        guages and downloading external dependencies to properly test.
     3. Font Packages Although the automated grader has most metrically-identical fonts (e.g.,
        Liberation Sans instead of Arial), some font packages used in human deliverables still
        causes certain deliverables to be rendered differently than they would appear on a computer
        that has these fonts installed.
     4. Speech-to-text transcription: The automated grader has limited speech to text function-
        ality inside the container, and struggles with non-voice sounds.

A.6.4   AUTOMATED GRADER PACKAGES

To ensure the model can process a wide variety of file types in GDPval, the following packages
are pre-installed in the base production Docker image. These were also made available to the agent
during sampling of OpenAI models.

jupyter-client==8.6.1                             scikit-image==0.20.0
jupyter-core==5.5.1                               folium==0.12.1
jupyter-server==2.14.0                            wordcloud==1.9.2
jupyterlab==4.1.8                                 faker==8.13.2
jupyterlab-pygments==0.3.0                        fpdf2==2.8.3
jupyterlab-server==2.27.1                         soundfile==0.10.2
aiohttp==3.9.5                                    kerykeion==2.1.16
hypercorn==0.14.3                                 pdfkit==0.6.1
notebook==6.5.1                                   pycountry==20.7.3
nbclassic==0.4.5                                  countryinfo==0.1.2
pydantic==1.10.2                                  tabulate==0.9.0
fastapi[all]==0.95.2                              shap==0.39.0
websockets==10.3                                  pylog==1.1
tqdm==4.64.0                                      pyprover==0.5.6
matplotlib==3.6.3                                 pytesseract==0.3.8
matplotlib-venn==0.11.6                           qrcode==7.3
numpy==1.24.0                                     basemap==1.3.9
numpy-financial==1.0.0                            pygraphviz==1.7
scipy==1.14.1                                     networkx==2.8.8
pandas==1.5.3                                     pyttsx3==2.90
statsmodels==0.13.5                               nashpy==0.0.35
sympy==1.13.1                                     docx2txt==0.8
seaborn==0.11.2                                   typing-extensions==4.10.0
scikit-learn==1.1.3                               torch==2.5.1
nltk==3.9.1                                       torchaudio==2.5.1
plotnine==0.10.1                                  torchtext==0.18.0
shapely==1.7.1                                    torchvision==0.20.1
fiona==1.9.2                                      PyMuPDF==1.21.1
geopandas==0.10.2                                 pdf2image==1.16.3
ffmpeg-python==0.2.0                              pyth3==0.7
pydub==0.25.1                                     h5py==3.8.0
moviepy==1.0.3                                    tables==3.8.0
opencv-python==4.5.5.62                           rarfile==4.0
Pillow==9.1.0                                     odfpy==1.4.1
python-docx==0.8.11                               pymc==4.0.1
python-pptx==0.6.21                               jax==0.2.28
openpyxl==3.0.10                                  pyxlsb==1.0.8
xml-python==0.4.3                                 keras==2.6.0
geopy==2.2.0                                      xgboost==1.4.2


                                               23
loguru==0.5.3                                       mtcnn==0.1.1
plotly==5.3.0                                       imgkit==1.2.2
graphviz==0.17                                      chardet==3.0.4
fuzzywuzzy==0.18.0                                  bokeh==2.4.0
pydot==1.4.2                                        tabula==1.0.5
gensim==4.3.1                                       camelot-py==0.10.1
pypandoc==1.6.3                                     exchange_calendars==3.4
einops==0.3.2                                       weasyprint==53.3
reportlab==3.6.12                                   pronouncing==0.2.0
gradio==2.2.15                                      cryptography==3.4.8
mutagen==1.45.1                                     spacy==3.4.4
librosa==0.8.1                                      requests==2.31.0
svglib==1.1.0                                       mne==0.23.4
gtts==2.2.3                                         pyopenssl==21.0.0
textblob==0.15.3                                    snowflake-connector-python==2.7.12
rasterio==1.3.3                                     databricks-sql-connector==0.9.1
rdflib==6.0.0                                       ddtrace˜=2.8.1
rdkit==2024.9.6                                     datadog˜=0.49.1
biopython==1.84                                     pytest˜=8.2.0
cairosvg==2.5.2                                     pytest-cov˜=5.0.0
markdownify==0.9.3                                  pytest-json-report˜=1.5.0
anytree==2.8.0                                      coverage˜=7.5.1
pdfplumber==0.6.2                                   pytest-asyncio˜=0.23.6
trimesh==3.9.29                                     catboost˜=1.2.7
svgwrite==1.4.1                                     lightgbm˜=4.5.0
pdfrw==0.4                                          imblearn˜=0.0
pyzbar==0.1.8                                       imbalanced-learn˜=0.12.3
dlib==19.24.2                                       rapidfuzz˜=3.10.1

We also installed the following additional packages, and we tell the model in the prompt it has access
to these additional packages:

libreoffice                                         pedalboard==0.9.9
aspose-words==25.8.0                                pyloudnorm==0.1.1
av==11.0.0                                          srt==3.5.3
cadquery==2.4.0                                     xlrd==2.0.1
cadquery-ocp==7.7.0

A.7   F URTHER M ETHODOLOGICAL D ETAILS ON S ELECTING O CCUPATIONS

Assigning Occupations to Sectors. We assigned occupations to sectors by using the 2023 BLS
National Employment Matrix from U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (2025a) to identify the sector
with the highest employment for each occupation. This involved filtering to “Line Item” occupa-
tions, taking the first two digits of NAICS codes, dropping “total employment” rows, summing 2023
employment, and assigning each occupation to the sector with the largest share of employment.
Detail about O*NET Data Source

Occupations in GDPval. We arrived at 831 occupations by filtering to “Detailed” occupations
from the May 2024 OEWS national employment and wage statistics U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics
(2025b) to exclude any aggregate employment categories. We dropped “All Other” occupations,
which are catch-all categories within a broader group that bundle together occupations that don’t fit
into any of the detailed occupations in that group. Dropping “All Other” occupations left us with
761 occupations.

Calculation of Total Wages Earned by Occupation. Estimated total wages earned is calculated
as total employment * mean annual salary for jobs with annual salaries, and total employment *
hourly salary * typical work year of 2080 hours for jobs with only hourly salaries. The determination

                                                 24
of which jobs had annual vs. hourly salaries was included in O*NET data. 2080 hours is cited as
a “typical work year” by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), assuming someone works 40 hours
per week. This is an imperfect estimate (eg., the BLS acknowledges actors “generally do not work
40 hours per week, year round”) but is the most precise estimate provided by the BLS.

Classifying Occupations as Digital. To classify occupations as predominantly digital, we use
a task-based approach. For many occupations, the O*NET database contains task statements and
ratings that list all the tasks performed by a worker in an occupation.11 The O*NET data is provided
on the 6-digit SOC occupational code level (SOC-6). We map the O*NET SOC-6 occupations and
the corresponding tasks to occupations in the OEWS dataset which reports wages at the 4-digit SOC
level (“SOC-4”). For each SOC-4 occupation, we classify its tasks as either digital or non-digital
using a prompted GPT-4o model that receives both the occupation and task. We then calculate the
weighted share of digital tasks for each occupation. Occupations are classified as digital if their
digital share exceeds a threshold of 0.60.
To calculate the weights for our weighted task share, we use task ratings data from O*NET surveys,
which includes the relevance, frequency, and importance of each task of the occupation.12 We first
calculate an Adjusted Task Score for each combination of 6-digit SOC occupation and task. This
score is defined as the simple average of the three normalized task ratings: task frequency, task
importance, and task relevance. Each rating is normalized relative to the maximum observed rating
(e.g. the importance ratings are out of 5).13 If one of these ratings is missing for a task, we impute
the value with the mean of that rating across all tasks within the same occupation. For example, if
a task lacks a frequency rating, we assign it the average normalized frequency rating of all tasks in
the occupation.
We then aggregate these 6-digit Adjusted Task Scores into 4-digit Adjusted Task Scores (for each
set of 4-digit SOC occupations and tasks). We do this by summing the SOC-6 Adjusted Task Scores
of SOC-6 occupations within a SOC-4 occupation for each task.14 For example, the SOC-4 oc-
cupation Computer Occupations, All Other combines two 6-digit SOC occupations (Information
Security Engineers and Penetration Testers) which have one task in common: “Identify security sys-
tem weaknesses, using penetration tests.” This task has two SOC-6 Adjusted Task Scores which are
added together to create the SOC-4 Adjusted Task Score.
Next, we calculate the Weighted Task Share for each combination of 4-digit SOC occupation and
task. The Weighted Task Share is the Adjusted Task Score of the occupation-task pair divided by
the sum of Adjusted Task Scores of that occupation. For each occupation, the sum of Weighted Task
Share across all its tasks is equal to one. The Weighted Task Share gives us a measure of the relative
significance of each task for a given occupation. These Weighted Task Shares are the weights used
to calculate the weighted share of digital tasks for each occupation.

Handling Missing Data.

       1. Missing Task Statements. Some occupations in OEWS lacked associated task statements
          or ratings. Forty-seven of these were broad “All Other” categories without component tasks
          15
             ; twelve others were split into finer sub-occupations in O*NET 29.0 (as of August 2025).
  11
      Note that while O*NET distinguishes between Core and Supplemental tasks in its task data, we treat these
two task types equally in our calculation of task share.
   12
      For the two occupations without O*NET 28.3 task ratings (“Facilities Managers” and “Medical
Dosimetrists”), we used task ratings from O*NET 29.0.
   13
      The maximum frequency value is 7, the maximum importance value is 5, and the maximum relevance
value is 100.
   14
      If a SOC-4 occupation is mapped to one SOC-6 occupation, the SOC-6 and SOC-4 Adjusted Task Scores
are the same.
   15
      These occupations were: Entertainers and Performers, Sports and Related Workers, All Other; Postsec-
ondary Teachers, All Other; Production Workers, All Other; Office and Administrative Support Workers, All
Other; Teachers and Instructors, All Other; Surgeons, All Other; Information and Record Clerks, All Other;
Community and Social Service Specialists, All Other; Educational Instruction and Library Workers, All Other;
Sales and Related Workers, All Other; Education Administrators, All Other; Social Workers, All Other; Legal
Support Workers, All Other; Food Preparation and Serving Related Workers, All Other; Personal Care and
Service Workers, All Other; Food Processing Workers, All Other; Motor Vehicle Operators, All Other; Finan-


                                                     25
         For the latter, we incorporated the full set of component tasks from their sub-occupations in
         O*NET 29.0. The exact reconciliation of how we mapped these 12 occupations is below:
          (a) Tour and Travel Guides: This SOC Code is broken out into two occupations: Tour
               Guides and Escorts and “Travel Guides”. We added the tasks from both occupations.
          (b) Miscellaneous Construction and Related Workers: This SOC Code is broken out
               into three occupations: “Segmental Pavers”, “Weatherization Installers and Techni-
               cians”, and “Construction and Related Workers, All Other”. We added all of the tasks
               from “Segmental Pavers” and “Weatherization Installers.” “Construction and Related
               Workers, All Other” is a general occupation category without component tasks.
          (c) Teaching Assistants: This SOC Code is broken out into three occupations: Teach-
               ing Assistants, Preschool, Elementary, Middle, and Secondary School, Except Spe-
               cial Education, Teaching Assistants, Special Education, and Teaching Assistants, All
               Other. We added the tasks from Teaching Assistants, Preschool, Elementary, Middle,
               and Secondary School, Except Special Education, and Teaching Assistants, Special
               Education. Teaching Assistants, All Other is a general occupation category without
               component tasks.
          (d) Buyers and Purchasing Agents: This SOC Code is broken out into three occupa-
               tions: Buyers and Purchasing Agents, Farm Products, Wholesale and Retail Buyers,
               Except Farm Products, and Purchasing Agents, Except Wholesale, Retail, and Farm
               Products. We added the tasks from the three occupations.
          (e) Substance Abuse, Behavioral Disorder, and Mental Health Counselors: This
               SOC Code is broken out into two occupations: Substance Abuse and Behavioral Dis-
               order Counselors and Mental Health Counselors. We added the tasks from both occu-
               pations.
           (f) Clinical Laboratory Technologists and Technicians: This SOC Code is broken
               out into six occupations: Medical and Clinical Laboratory Technologists, Cytogenetic
               Technologists, Cytotechnologists, Histotechnologists, Medical and Clinical Labora-
               tory Technicians, and Histology Technicians. We added the tasks from all these occu-
               pations.
          (g) Special Education Teachers, Kindergarten and Elementary School: This SOC
               Code is broken out into two occupations: Special Education Teachers, Kindergarten
               and Special Education Teachers, Elementary School. We added the tasks from both
               occupations.
          (h) Home Health and Personal Care Aides: This SOC Code is broken out into two
               occupations: Home Health Aides and Personal Care Aides. We added the tasks from
               both occupations.
           (i) Property Appraisers and Assessors: This SOC Code is broken out into two oc-
               cupations: Appraisers and Assessors of Real Estate and Appraisers of Personal and
               Business Property. We added the tasks from both occupations.
           (j) Miscellaneous Assemblers and Fabricators: This SOC Code is broken out into
               two occupations: Assemblers and Fabricators, All Other and Team Assemblers. We
               match to Team Assemblers since Assemblers and Fabricators, All Other is a general
               occupation category without component tasks.
          (k) Electrical, Electronic, and Electromechanical Assemblers, Except Coil Winders,
               Tapers, and Finishers: This SOC Code is broken out into two occupations: Electri-
               cal and Electronic Equipment Assemblers and Electromechanical Equipment Assem-
               blers. We added the tasks from both occupations.
cial Clerks, All Other; Media and Communication Workers, All Other; Counselors, All Other; Social Sciences
Teachers, Postsecondary, All Other; First-Line Supervisors of Protective Service Workers, All Other; Dentists,
All Other Specialists; Material Moving Workers, All Other; Helpers, Construction Trades, All Other; Drafters,
All Other; Media and Communication Equipment Workers, All Other; Metal Workers and Plastic Workers,
All Other; Cooks, All Other; Designers, All Other; Life Scientists, All Other; Building Cleaning Workers, All
Other; Precision Instrument and Equipment Repairers, All Other; Grounds Maintenance Workers, All Other;
Religious Workers, All Other; Artists and Related Workers, All Other; Textile, Apparel, and Furnishings Work-
ers, All Other; Gambling Service Workers, All Other; Transportation Workers, All Other; Extraction Workers,
All Other; Entertainment Attendants and Related Workers, All Other; Woodworkers, All Other; Underground
Mining Machine Operators, All Other; Agricultural Workers, All Other; Logging Workers, All Other; Rail
Transportation Workers, All Other; Communications Equipment Operators, All Other.


                                                     26
           (l) First-Line Supervisors of Transportation and Material Moving Workers, Except
               Aircraft Cargo Handling Supervisors: This SOC Code is broken out into four oc-
               cupations: First-Line Supervisors of Helpers, Laborers, and Material Movers, Hand,
               First-Line Supervisors of Material-Moving Machine and Vehicle Operators, First-Line
               Supervisors of Passenger Attendants, and First-Line Supervisors of Transportation
               Workers, All Other. We added the tasks from First-Line Supervisors of Helpers,
               Laborers, and Material Movers, Hand, First-Line Supervisors of Material-Moving
               Machine and Vehicle Operators, and First-Line Supervisors of Passenger Attendants.
               First-Line Supervisors of Transportation Workers, All Other is a general occupation
               category without component tasks.
      2. Missing Task Ratings. There are 36 SOC-6 occupations which do not have any task rating
         in O*NET 28.3 or 29.0. These correspond to 34 SOC-4 occupations.16 Among these, 2
         SOC-4 occupations (Data Scientists and Web and Digital Interface Designers) have task
         ratings for some of the component SOC-6 occupations which allow us to compute the Ad-
         justed and Weighted Task Share measures. For the rest of the 32 SOC-4 occupations that
         have no O*NET task ratings, we cannot compute the Adjusted or Weighted Task Share
         measure. Instead, we proxy the Weighted Task Share as follows: for each combination of
         4-digit SOC occupation and task, we calculate the number of times the task appears (i.e.,
         task frequency) for the occupation and divide by the sum of task frequency of all tasks
         of that occupation. For example, the 4-digit SOC occupation “Special Education Teachers,
         Kindergarten and Elementary School” combines two 6-digit SOC occupations (Special Ed-
         ucation Teachers, Elementary School and Special Education Teachers, Kindergarten) has
         43 unique tasks. Among these 17 tasks appear twice. Thus, the sum of task frequency
         across 43 tasks is 60. For each task that appears once, the proxy Weighted Task Share is
         1/60 = 0.0017, and for each task that appears twice, the proxy Weighted Task Share is 2/60
         = 0.0033.

A.7.1    VALIDATING THE D IGITAL TASKS M EASURE
We benchmark our “knowledge work” classification method against the task-content framework of
Acemoglu & Autor (2011).
The framework in Acemoglu & Autor (2011) is based on the U.S. Department of Labor’s O*NET
survey, which collects data on the activities, work “content”, and abilities required for each occupa-
tion. The framework aggregates these measures into five scores:
      1. Non-routine cognitive: Analytical.
      2. Non-routine cognitive: Interpersonal.
      3. Routine cognitive.
      4. Routine manual.
      5. Non-routine manual physical.
Each score is computed as a composite measure of select O*NET “Importance” scales. For example,
the “Non-routine cognitive: Analytical” score for each occupation is computed by summing the
(normalized) values of the “Analyzing data/information” work activity, the “Thinking creatively”
work activity, and the “Interpreting information for others” work activity. A high numerical value
for an occupation for a given score indicates that the occupation relies heavily on that type of work.
   16
      These SOC-4 occupations are: Aircraft Service Attendants, Bus Drivers, School, Calibration Technologists
and Technicians, Cardiologists, Crematory Operators, Data Scientists, Disc Jockeys, Except Radio, Emergency
Medical Technicians, Emergency Medicine Physicians, Entertainment and Recreation Managers, Except Gam-
bling, Financial and Investment Analysts, Financial Risk Specialists, First-Line Supervisors of Entertainment
and Recreation Workers, Except Gambling Services, First-Line Supervisors of Security Workers, Fundrais-
ing Managers, Health Information Technologists and Medical Registrars, Hydrologic Technicians, Legislators,
Lighting Technicians, Medical Records Specialists, Orthopedic Surgeons, Except Pediatric, Paramedics, Pe-
diatric Surgeons, Project Management Specialists, Public Relations Managers, Sales Representatives of Ser-
vices, Except Advertising, Insurance, Financial Services, and Travel, School Bus Monitors, Shuttle Drivers and
Chauffeurs, Software Developers, Special Education Teachers, Kindergarten and Elementary School, Substi-
tute Teachers, Short-Term, Taxi Drivers, Teaching Assistants, Except Postsecondary, Web and Digital Interface
Designers.


                                                     27
We compute the Acemoglu & Autor (2011) scores for each occupation and then compare them with
our measures of knowledge work (that is, the share of digital tasks and a binary “knowledge work”
indicator for each occupation).
In our first set of results, we compare each Acemoglu & Autor (2011) task-content score with the
share of digital tasks in an occupation. The patterns are clear: occupations with higher digital-task
shares score systematically higher on the non-routine cognitive dimensions and lower on the manual
dimensions. In other words, the more an occupation relies on digital tasks, the more it resembles
cognitive, non-routine work.




                      Figure 17: Distribution of occupations and task contents
In our second set of results, we look at the relationship between the Acemoglu & Autor (2011) scores
and our binary measure of “knowledge work.” In the following figure, we plot each occupation’s
value for each score, and color occupations by the paper’s knowledge-work classification: blue
for occupations identified as knowledge work and red for all others. The pattern is again clear–
knowledge-work occupations cluster at the top of the non-routine cognitive distributions and at the
bottom of the routine and manual distributions. Taken together, these results suggest that our digital-
task classification is closely aligned with the economic literature on cognitive/manual work.




                      Figure 18: Scatterplot of digital tasks and task contents




                                                  28
Sector                   % GDP      Top Occupations and Total Compensation (in Billions USD)
Real Estate and Rental   13.8%      Property/RE/Community Association Managers — $24.54B
and Leasing
                                    Counter and Rental Clerks — $17.42B
                                    Real Estate Sales Agents — $13.53B
                                    Real Estate Brokers — $4.55B
                                    Concierges — $1.80B
Manufacturing            10.0%      First-Line Supervisors of Production and Operating Workers — $51.07B
                                    Buyers and Purchasing Agents — $39.79B
                                    Shipping, Receiving, and Inventory Clerks — $38.50B
                                    Industrial Engineers — $37.79B
                                    Mechanical Engineers — $31.57B
Professional, Scientific, 8.1%      Software Developers — $239.18B
and Technical Services
                                    Lawyers — $136.66B
                                    Accountants and Auditors — $135.44B
                                    Computer and Information Systems Managers — $121.44B
                                    Project Management Specialists — $108.77B
Government               11.3%      Compliance Officers — $33.80B
                                    Administrative Services Managers — $32.03B
                                    Child, Family, and School Social Workers — $24.10B
                                    First-Line Supervisors of Police and Detectives — $17.00B
                                    Recreation Workers — $11.51B
Health Care and Social   7.6%       Registered Nurses — $323.05B
Assistance
                                    First-Line Supervisors of Office/Admin Support — $107.02B
                                    Medical & Health Services Managers — $77.93B
                                    Nurse Practitioners — $40.58B
                                    Medical Secretaries & Admin Assistants — $37.87B
Finance and Insurance    7.4%       Financial Managers — $147.74B
                                    Customer Service Representatives — $123.70B
                                    Securities, Commodities, and Financial Services Sales Agents — $52.14B
                                    Personal Financial Advisors — $43.33B
                                    Financial and Investment Analysts — $39.67B
Retail Trade             6.3%       General & Operations Managers — $477.16B
                                    1st-Line Supervisors of Retail Sales Workers — $58.27B
                                    Pharmacists — $45.12B
                                    Private Detectives & Investigators — $2.39B
Wholesale Trade          5.8%       Sales Reps, Wholesale & Mfg (Except Tech/Scientific) — $103.21B
                                    Sales Managers — $97.16B
                                    Sales Reps, Wholesale & Mfg (Tech/Scientific) — $33.66B
                                    1st-Line Supervisors of Non-Retail Sales Workers — $21.43B
                                    Order Clerks — $3.86B
Information              5.4%       Producers & Directors — $16.60B
                                    Editors — $8.18B
                                    News Analysts, Reporters, and Journalists — $4.41B
                                    Audio & Video Technicians — $4.30B
                                    Film & Video Editors — $2.41B

Table 1: Sectors, their value added as a percentage of U.S. GDP (Q2 2024), with representative top
occupations and total compensation in billions (USD).



                                                29
