                                         From Correctness to Collaboration: Toward a Human-Centered Framework for
                                         Evaluating AI Agent Behavior in Software Engineering

                                         TAO DONG, HARINI SAMPATH∗ , JA YOUNG LEE∗ , SHERRY Y. SHI∗ , and ANDREW MACVEAN, Google
                                         LLC, USA

                                         As Large Language Models (LLMs) evolve from code generators into collaborative partners for software engineers, our methods
                                         for evaluation are lagging. Current benchmarks, focused on code correctness, fail to capture the nuanced, interactive behaviors
                                         essential for successful human-AI partnership. To bridge this evaluation gap, this paper makes two core contributions. First, we present
                                         a foundational taxonomy of desirable agent behaviors for enterprise software engineering, derived from an analysis of 91 sets of




arXiv:2512.23844v1 [cs.SE] 29 Dec 2025
                                         user-defined agent rules. This taxonomy defines four key expectations of agent behavior: Adhere to Standards and Processes, Ensure
                                         Code Quality and Reliability, Solving Problems Effectively, and Collaborating with the User.
                                             Second, recognizing that these expectations are not static, we introduce the Context-Adaptive Behavior (CAB) Framework. This
                                         emerging framework reveals how behavioral expectations shift along two empirically-derived axes: the Time Horizon (from immediate
                                         needs to future ideals), established through interviews with 15 expert engineers, and the Type of Work (from enterprise production
                                         to rapid prototyping, for example), identified through a prompt analysis of a prototyping agent. Together, these contributions offer
                                         a human-centered foundation for designing and evaluating the next generation of AI agents, moving the field’s focus from the
                                         correctness of generated code toward the dynamics of true collaborative intelligence.

                                         CCS Concepts: • Human-centered computing → Empirical studies in HCI.

                                         Additional Key Words and Phrases: Human-AI Collaboration, AI Agents, LLM Evaluation, Software Engineering


                                         1    Introduction
                                         Powered by recent advancements in Large Language Models (LLMs), the nature of Generative AI tools for software
                                         engineering has undergone a fundamental transformation over the past few years, shifting from passive code completers
                                         [30] to increasingly autonomous agents capable of tackling complex tasks including testing [14], migrations [22], bug
                                         fixing [20, 24] , and more. This evolution marks a critical paradigm shift: from AI as a tool to be wielded by a developer,
                                         to AI as a collaborative partner integrated into a software team’s workflow [15, 18]. As these agents start cooperating
                                         with human software engineers over multiple turns of actions, the success of the human-AI partnership hinges less on
                                         the raw correctness of any single generated code block and more on the quality of the collaborative problem solving
                                         process.
                                             This rapid evolution from tool to partner has been heavily guided by the AI research community’s primary mechanism
                                         for measuring progress: benchmarks. Serving as de facto goalposts, benchmarks define what "better" means and
                                         incentivize the development of more capable models. To this end, benchmarks like SWE-bench [12], LiveCodeBench
                                         [11], and Aider Polyglot [4] have been undeniably successful. They have spurred a race to improve the functional
                                         correctness of AI-generated code, dramatically advancing LLMs’ coding capabilities.
                                             Yet, this very success of benchmarks has created a critical blind spot. By fixating on the final output, these benchmarks
                                         are fundamentally unequipped to assess the behavioral qualities required for an effective partner. They ignore the
                                         crucial questions that arise in collaborative work: Does the agent adhere to project standards? Does it communicate its
                                         ∗ Equal contribution.


                                         Authors’ Contact Information: Tao Dong, taodong@acm.org; Harini Sampath, harinis@google.com; Ja Young Lee, jayoung.j.lee@gmail.com; Sherry Y.
                                         Shi, sherryyshi@google.com; Andrew Macvean, amacvean@google.com, Google LLC, USA.
                                                                                                                                                                                    1
2                                         Tao Dong, Harini Sampath, Ja Young Lee, Sherry Y. Shi, and Andrew Macvean


reasoning? Does it effectively incorporate user feedback? This disconnect from the reality of collaborative software
development [27] has created a significant "evaluation gap."
    Recognizing this evaluation gap, an emerging body of work has shifted focus from final outcomes to the agent’s
execution trajectory, analyzing the step-by-step process of its work [7, 12, 23]. While this is a crucial step forward, current
trajectory analyses primarily focus on identifying mechanistic failures, such as incorrect tool usage or hallucinated
commands. This approach, however, implicitly frames the agent’s process through the lens of machine-centric errors
rather than human-centric behaviors. It still treats the agent as a complex tool to be debugged, not a partner whose
collaborative style must be assessed. This reveals a deeper, more fundamental problem: the research community lacks a
systematic, user-grounded understanding of what constitutes desirable agent behavior in the first place. Before we can
meaningfully evaluate the cooperative process, we must first define what a "good" process looks like from the software
engineer’s perspective.
    To address this challenge and move beyond a monolithic view of agent performance, we ask the overarching research
question: What are the core behaviors an intelligent agent should be evaluated for in software engineering? Our work
answers this by making two distinct but related contributions grounded in three research studies.
    Our primary contribution is a foundational taxonomy of desirable behaviors for AI agents in contemporary enterprise
software engineering. Derived directly from our analysis of 91 sets of real-world user-defined rules for customizing
agent behavior (Study 1), this taxonomy provides a baseline of four core behavioral expectations that are critical for an
agent’s effectiveness today. Recognizing that any static taxonomy is inherently limited, our secondary contribution is
an emerging framework for adapting expected agent behavior along two axes: Time Horizon and Type of Work (see
Figure 2). Its two analytical axes are empirically derived from our other studies. We establish its Time Horizon axis
through semi-structured interviews with 15 expert engineers (Study 2), allowing us to map the critical headroom
between current needs and the aspirational goals towards Artificial General Intelligence (AGI). We then define its Type
of Work axis through an analysis of user prompts for an AI agent focused on rapid prototyping (Study 3), which reveals
how behavioral expectations could shift when the task changes from production-grade engineering to UI-focused new
product exploration.
    Together, our taxonomy and framework offer a nuanced, human-centered foundation for designing and evaluating
the next generation of software engineering agents. They move the conversation beyond the monolithic metric of code
correctness, providing the vocabulary and structure needed to assess true collaborative intelligence. In the remainder
of this paper, we situate our work within prior research, detail the three studies that form the empirical basis of our
contributions, and conclude by discussing how our framework can directly inform and enhance emerging trajectory-
based evaluation methods—helping to finally close the gap between how we build AI partners and how we measure
their success.




2    Related Work
Our work is situated at the confluence of three research areas: the benchmarking of Software Engineering (SWE) agents,
the evaluation of human-AI collaboration, and the study of human expertise in software development. We argue that
while each area provides a crucial piece of the puzzle, a significant gap exists at their intersection—a gap our work aims
to fill.
From Correctness to Collaboration: Toward a Human-Centered Framework for Evaluating AI Agent Behavior in
Software Engineering                                                                                                       3

2.1   Evaluating SWE Agents
The dominant paradigm for evaluating AI in software engineering has evolved alongside agent capabilities. Early
benchmarks such as HumanEval [6] and MBPP [1] established functional correctness as the primary metric, treating
the agent as a black-box code generator. Success was measured by pass@k rates on unit tests, a suitable method for
evaluating single-shot code completion. As tasks grew more complex, benchmarks like SWE-Bench [12] and SWE-Lancer
[21] maintained this focus on final outcomes, albeit for more challenging, multi-file problems.
  Recognizing that functional correctness is only one facet of code quality [8, 26, 29], subsequent work introduced
multi-dimensional evaluations. For example, Zheng et al. [34] proposed the RACE benchmark to assess code for
Readability, mAintainability, Correctness, and Efficiency, reflecting a more holistic view of the final artifact.
  Most recently, with the rise of autonomous agents in coding, the research focus has shifted from the final output
to the process of generating it. Trajectory analysis has emerged as a key technique for understanding how an agent
arrives at a solution. For example, SWE-Agent’s analysis of the agent’s failure modes helped its developers identify and
make improvements to its tools and execution environment.
  To guide failure mode analyses, Frameworks like MAST [23] and TRAIL [7] provide valuable perspectives and key
issues to look out for. MAST proposes a taxonomy of multi-agent system failures, focusing on agentic reasoning and
inter-agent coordination, while TRAIL’s taxonomy covers failures in agentic reasoning as well as system-level failures
like resource management and configuration errors. Bouzenia et. al’s empirical study on agent trajectories reveal some
common patterns and anti-patterns of popular SWE agents that further our understanding of their process [5]. However,
current trajectory analyses are fundamentally system-centric (e.g., tool calling or file editing failures), focusing on
capabilities that are necessary but insufficient for the agent to be helpful to the user.


2.2   Evaluating AI’s Ability to Collaborate with Users
One important capability of coding agents that many existing evaluation techniques do not assess is the agent’s ability
to collaborate with the user. In contrast, in domains such as medicine and education, human-centric metrics have
been adopted when assessing LLMs’ capabilities. For instance, studies in medicine evaluate AI not just for diagnostic
accuracy but also for the quality and empathy of its communication with patients [2, 17]. Similarly, in education, AI
tutors are assessed on their ability to provide scaffolding and encouragement, not just correct answers [13, 19, 25].
  Within the AI for SWE domain, researchers are beginning to acknowledge this need. In an observational study,
Kumar et al. [15] found a direct correlation between successful task completion and the amount of human-agent
communication, highlighting the importance of interaction quality.
  Evaluating interaction quality in an offline setting is a challenge, as there is no user for the agent to interact with. To
address this challenge, benchmarks like MINT [31] and InterCode [33] introduced a basic simulated user. Han et al.
[9] further evolved the idea of a simulated user by enabling varied responses and establishing personas with different
expertise levels. While these approaches make interaction testable in offline settings, the personas themselves remain
speculative. One way to ground these LLM-as-synthetic-users is to imbue them, through their system prompts, with
the values and expectations of professional software developers, which our research seeks to uncover.


2.3   Understanding Skills of Software Engineers
To understand what leads to the effectiveness of software engineers that could be missing in AI agents, we draw insights
from studies of professional software engineers. There have been multiple studies in literature focused on the attributes
4                                                  Tao Dong, Harini Sampath, Ja Young Lee, Sherry Y. Shi, and Andrew Macvean


of great software engineers. Li et.al [16] conducted mixed-methods research with experienced software engineers at
Microsoft to understand attributes that make a great software engineer. They identified 53 attributes spanning themes
like being curious, long-term thinking, making well-considered and informed decisions, sharing knowledge with others,
and continuously learning and improving.
    In more specific domains and contexts, Hewner [10] explored desired qualifications for new game developers,
identifying interpersonal skills—such as the ability to collaborate effectively and set aside personal ego—as crucial
alongside core technical competencies. Similarly, Begel et al. [3] observed that in pair programming settings, participants
favored partners who offered complementary perspectives, demonstrated open-mindedness, and possessed strong
communication skills.
    We leverage the insights from these studies to inform the design of our expert interviews (Study 2). Rather than
assuming a direct mapping of human skills to AI agents, we explicitly asked participants to compare their expectations
for an AI agent to those for a junior human developer.
    Building on these bodies of work, we propose a taxonomy of desirable behaviors for interactive SWE agents. This
taxonomy distinguishes itself from previous efforts by addressing multiple dimensions of both the agent’s trajectory
and its final output, and importantly, it is grounded in user preferences and expectations, distilled from user-defined
agent rules in an enterprise setting, and then extended into a framework through expert interviews and prompt analysis
in a different work context.


3     Study 1: Expected Agent Behavior in Enterprise Software Engineering
Our initial effort focused on creating a taxonomy of desirable agent behaviors immediately applicable to an enterprise
software engineering context. To identify these behaviors, we performed a qualitative content analysis of user-defined
rules1 for steering the behavior of a coding agent used at a global technology company. These rules, stored in the
codebase as a markdown file, customize the agent’s default behavior as a preamble of user prompts.


3.1    Methods
In July 2025, we compiled a corpus of 91 agent rule files, each corresponding to a distinct project, from the company’s
codebase. We started our analysis by manually examining 15 files from our corpus. Two co-authors conducted collabo-
rative and iterative open coding on the initial 15 files from our corpus, which led to a codebook of 15 behavior codes
grouped by 4 themes.
    To code the rest of the corpus and in anticipation of repeating this analysis as the number of agent rules grow, we
tuned an LLM-based rule annotator based on our codebook. The annotator was built on one of the frontier reasoning
LLMs. We instructed the model to first segment each file into a set of coherent rules and then annotate each rule with
no more than three codes from the codebook. To mitigate hallucination, the model was given an option to annotate a
rule with “TBD” when no code appears to be relevant.
    We evaluated the reliability of the annotator by applying it to 5 randomly selected files from our corpus. Across
these 5 files in our validation set, the LLM-based annotator identified 95 unique rules, about 7.2% of all the rules in
our corpus, and achieved a zero hallucination rate, 94.4% precision, and 91.2% recall. In this assessment, precision was
defined as the proportion of correct rule-code pairs out of all the pairs suggested by the LLM, and recall was defined as


1 A general introduction to agent rules can be found at: https://cursor.com/docs/context/rules.
From Correctness to Collaboration: Toward a Human-Centered Framework for Evaluating AI Agent Behavior in
Software Engineering                                                                                                       5

the proportion of the former out of all correct rule-code pairs. We consider this performance to be acceptable for our
qualitative analysis.


3.2   Findings
Our analysis of the agent rules defined by software engineers revealed 4 core expectations and 15 specific behaviors for
AI agents, summarized in Table 1. In the rest of this section, we describe these expectations in detail, the underlying
user needs they reflect, and the interplay of different agent behaviors expected by software engineers. For the purposes
of anonymizing the company, we replaced identifying information with a descriptive text enclosed in angle brackets.

3.2.1 Adhering to Standards and Processes. A predominant theme was the expectation that the agent must strictly
adhere to established standards and project-specific processes. This expectation highlights the "brownfield" nature of
software development in a large enterprise where AI-generated code is expected to integrate seamlessly into a mature,
existing codebase. Users consider the following two related agent behaviors critical to satisfy this expectation:
  1. Following Established Best Practices: Users frequently instructed the agent to "follow," "adhere to," "consult,"
and "use" pre-existing, widely-accepted guidelines for programming languages and frameworks within the company.
These included documents like "CSS Best Practices," "efficient java guide," "Go Style," and the "TypeScript style guide."
These rules represent a desire for the agent to align with institutional standards, ensuring its output meets a baseline
level of quality and professionalism applicable across multiple projects.
  The specificity of these rules can vary across projects. While some rules simply link to online documentation, others
underscore key steps directly in the rules file itself, indicating differing degrees of confidence in the agent’s capacity to
identify and implement guidelines.

      * Organize your Angular project with one directory per feature.
      * Place common components in a `shared/` directory.
      * Use a single `NgModule` per <build system> package,
      except for <server platform> Angular applications that must use standalone components.
      * Include a `README.md` file to explain the development environment.
      * Follow the [Angular Style Guide](<URL to the guide>) for more details.

  2. Following Project Workflows and Conventions: Beyond general best practices, users specified a multitude of
project-specific procedures and conventions. These rules governed local practices such as dependency management,
interaction with external systems, test generation and execution, API usage patterns, naming conventions, and code
organization.

      The <package definition> file **MUST** be updated in this specific order:
      1. **Add** After creating your new `\_test.go` file,
      add a `go\_test` target to the `test/<package definition>` file.
      2. **Verify the test builds:** You **MUST** ensure the test build correctly.
      If not fix any errors and ensure it builds before proceeding

  By providing these rules, users effectively mandated an “orientation” for the AI agent. Their goal is likely to ensure
its contributions are not only functional but also conformant, preserving the integrity of the codebase and saving
significant downstream costs associated with code review, refactoring, and in the worst case, rework.
6                                           Tao Dong, Harini Sampath, Ja Young Lee, Sherry Y. Shi, and Andrew Macvean

Table 1. The behavior taxonomy for software engineering agents in an enterprise setting, identified through an analysis of user-defined
agent rules.


    Expectation                     Behavior                                 Definition
    1. Adhere to Standards          Follow Established Best Practices        Adhere to established coding patterns for spe-
    and Processes                                                            cific languages or frameworks, often by refer-
                                                                             encing documentation.
                                    Follow Project Workflows and             Follow project-specific procedures (e.g., depen-
                                    Conventions                              dency management, testing) and conventions
                                                                             (e.g., naming, code organization).
                                    Maintain Code Style                      Follow rules for code formatting, naming con-
    2. Ensure Code Quality
                                                                             ventions, and syntax to ensure consistency.
    and Reliability
                                    Write Readable and Maintainable          Write code that is easy for humans to under-
                                    Code                                     stand, modify, and debug by managing com-
                                                                             ments, complexity, and structure.
                                    Build Robust and Performant Soft- Write code that is resilient, well-tested, perfor-
                                    ware                              mant, and observable.
                                    Understand Project Context be- Learn about the project’s architecture, compo-
                                    fore Acting                    nents, and core technologies before taking ac-
    3. Solve Problems                                              tion.
    Effectively                     Validate Work Proactively                Verify work by running builds, tests, or other
                                                                             checks to ensure correctness before completion.
                                    Work Incrementally and Itera- Break down large tasks into smaller, verifiable
                                    tively                        steps to reduce complexity and simplify review.
                                    Maintain Task Focus                      Limit actions strictly to the user’s request, avoid-
                                                                             ing unrelated changes or refactoring.
                                    Infer Intent from Context                Use the current context (code, request) to re-
                                                                             solve ambiguity or fill in missing information
                                                                             proactively.
                                    Learn by Examples                        Infer correct patterns and approaches by exam-
                                                                             ining existing code in the project.
                                    Communicate Effectively                  Follow guidelines on how to format output and
    4. Collaborate with the                                                  communicate actions and progress to the user.
    User                            Seek Help and Clarification              Ask the user for input or guidance when stuck,
                                                                             unsure, or lacking information.
                                    Plan Collaboratively and Analyze         Create a plan, evaluate different options, and
                                    Trade-offs                               present it to the user for approval before execu-
                                                                             tion.
                                    Learn from Feedback and Past Ex- Record and apply knowledge from past tasks
                                    periences                        and mistakes to improve future performance
                                                                     and avoid repeating errors.
From Correctness to Collaboration: Toward a Human-Centered Framework for Evaluating AI Agent Behavior in
Software Engineering                                                                                                   7

3.2.2    Ensure Code Quality and Reliability. The agent rules demonstrate a deep concern for multiple facets of
code quality, extending far beyond functional correctness. Users instructed the agent to produce code that was not
only consistent in style but also readable, maintainable, reliable, and performant. Users articulated these expectations
through a variety of directives, which we group into three key areas below.
   Maintain Code Style: A significant portion of the rules centered on enforcing stylistic consistency, a critical factor
for managing a large-scale, multi-author codebase. These instructions fell into three categories:
        • Rule Application: Users frequently directed the agent to follow official style guides. These were often
          supplemented with hyper-specific inline rules for naming conventions, import ordering, or syntax.
        • Tool Execution: Adherence was often automated by instructing the agent to execute standard formatting and
          linting tools as part of its workflow.
        • Contextual Adaptation: Some users expected the agent to infer and adapt to the local style of the surrounding
          code and prioritize local conventions over global ones when they are not aligned.
        **Follow Local Style:** Adhere to the existing patterns and naming
        conventions of the code you are editing. This takes precedence over general
        style guides.
2. Write Readable and Maintainable Code: Users emphasized the need for AI-generated code that was easy for
other humans to understand, modify, and debug. This expectation frames code not as a set of instructions for a machine,
but as a form of communication within a development team. One rule demonstrated this principle perfectly:
        **Write for Others:** Code should be written with the assumption that
        someone else will read, understand, and maintain it.
        Your future self is also "someone else".
Specifically, users provided several types of guidance towards code maintainability:
        • High-Level Principles: Adherence to established software engineering philosophies like DRY ("Don’t Repeat
          Yourself"), "Loose Coupling," and the "Boy Scout Rule" (leave the code cleaner than you found it).
        • Structural Organization: Instructions to organize code into focused modules, manage dependencies correctly,
          and, critically, reuse existing utilities rather than creating redundant logic.
        **Helper Functions:** Before implementing common tasks, check for existing
        utilities in <a list of .ts files> and module-specific helpers.
        • Code-Level Simplification: Directives to write simple, clear code by avoiding deep nesting, simplifying
          complex conditions, and keeping functions short and focused.
        • Naming and Documentation: A strong focus on clear, descriptive names for variables and methods, as well
          as the creation and maintenance of comments and docstrings to provide context for future developers.
   Build Robust and Performant Software: Finally, users instructed the agent to produce code that was resilient,
efficient, and well-tested. They expected the agent to proactively avoid common pitfalls. For example, the rule below
guided the agent on memory management:
        Unsubscribe from observables using `take(1)`
        or other lifecycle-aware operators to prevent memory leaks.
   These rules about code quality communicate a clear user preference that the efficiency gain from agentic coding
should not come at the expense of the long-term health and coherence of the codebase. In an enterprise setting, code
8                                          Tao Dong, Harini Sampath, Ja Young Lee, Sherry Y. Shi, and Andrew Macvean


quality is a multi-faceted concept where users treat functional correctness as a baseline that often goes unmentioned.
Instead, users focused their instructions on enforcing the qualities that enable large teams to collaborate effectively
over time.

3.2.3    Solve Problems Effectively. Beyond adhering to work standards and ensuring code quality, users actively
sought to instill effective problem-solving heuristics in the agent. These rules represent a form of procedural knowledge,
teaching the agent not just what to do, but how to approach its tasks like an experienced engineer, such as:
    Understand Project Context before Acting: The agent should gather and internalize project-specific information
before making changes. This involves reading documentation and examining existing code to understand the project’s
architecture, tech stack, and design patterns.
    Work Incrementally and Iteratively: When approaching a large task, the agent should methodically break it
down into small, manageable steps. Directives such as "one BUILD file at a time," "small, single-purpose CLs," and
making the "smallest possible code change" were common among user-defined rules.
        **Incremental Changes:** Make the smallest possible code change,
        then run tests. Fix any failures before making further changes.
    Validate Work Proactively: Users mandated that the agent take responsibility for the quality of its own output
before presenting it to them. The agent was commanded to perform a range of validation actions, including building
the project, checking code style, and running tests.
        After finishing any changes, always run our unit tests
        by running `<command>` and iterating until these tests pass.
    Maintain Task Focus: To prevent unintended side effects or scope creep, users imposed strict constraints on the
agent’s actions. Using imperative phrases like "Only accept," "DO NOT engage," and "Leave... alone," users created clear
boundaries, demanding that the agent remain laser-focused on the specific task at hand.
    Infer Intent from Context: In a fascinating contrast to the need for strict focus, users also granted the agent
a degree of autonomy to resolve ambiguity, especially in low-stakes situations. Rather than halting and asking for
clarification, the agent was sometimes expected to use its reasoning capabilities to infer user intent from the available
context.
        If the user does not write any test description,
        the AI agent should still try inferencing the test case
        from the test case name, or any other information available.
    Learn by Example: Related to inferring the user’s intent from context, the agent was also expected to reason about
the best course of action from examples in the codebase,as shown in the example below:
        Inspect other tools in the tools/ dir and copy their approaches.
    These problem-solving heuristics appear to be driven by a distinct set of underlying user needs:
        • Mitigating Risk: The emphasis on incremental work—small, atomic commits that can be easily understood,
          verified, and, crucially, reverted—is a primary risk mitigation strategy.
        • Reducing Human Cognitive Load: By instructing the agent to validate its own work and fix its own errors,
          users aim to avoid reviewing half-baked or broken code. This shifts the responsibility for initial quality assurance
          onto the agent, saving the user’s time and attention from performing detailed verification and troubleshooting.
From Correctness to Collaboration: Toward a Human-Centered Framework for Evaluating AI Agent Behavior in
Software Engineering                                                                                                      9

        • Balancing Control and Autonomy: The rules reveal a fundamental tension in the desired human-agent
          relationship. On one hand, users impose rigid controls to prevent errors. On the other, they seek to leverage
          the agent’s reasoning capabilities by allowing it to infer intent in certain situations. Such practices reflect an
          ongoing calibration of the user’s mental model of the agent as a tool vs. a partner, reflected in the specific
          conditions under which the agent was encouraged to exercise more or less autonomy.

3.2.4    Collaborate with the User. Our analysis reveals that users expect the agent to be more than a passive tool;
they envision it as an active collaborator. Users defined protocols for a productive human-agent partnership, focusing on
how the agent should communicate, manage uncertainty, formulate plans, and learn over time. Four key collaborative
behaviors emerged from our analysis:
   Communicate Effectively: Users required communication that was precise, transparent, and efficient, prioritizing
substantive information over conversational pleasantries. This technical communication style aimed to ensure the
precision of information, maintain the user’s situational awareness, and facilitate exception management.
        You are STRICTLY FORBIDDEN from starting your messages with "Great",
        "Certainly", "Okay", "Sure". You should NOT be conversational in your responses,
        but rather direct and to the point. . .
        It is important you be clear and technical in your messages.
   Seek Help and Clarification: The agent was expected to recognize the limits of its own knowledge and capabilities.
Under conditions of ambiguity, high-stakes actions, or environmental blockers, it was instructed to pause and defer
to the user. Critically, Users also wanted these interruptions to be low-friction, often by having the agent provide
suggested answers to make it easy for the user to provide guidance.
        When you ask a question, provide the user with 2-4 suggested answers
        based on your question... However if you can use the available tools
        to avoid having to ask the user questions, you should do so.
Plan Collaboratively and Analyze Trade-offs: Before executing complex tasks, users required the agent to engage
in collaborative planning. This involved creating a plan, evaluating the pros and cons of different approaches, and
presenting recommendations for user approval. In some cases, the agent was even expected to exercise critical thinking,
challenging suboptimal initial requests and proposing better alternatives with clear justification.
        Critically evaluate all requests. If a prompt is ambiguous, suboptimal,
        or follows an anti-pattern, please challenge it and propose a better alternative,
        explaining the trade-offs, especially in the context of data engineering,
        <a SQL dialet>, and <a query tool>.
   Learn from Feedback and Past Experiences: Users sought to overcome the stateless nature of LLMs by instructing
the agent to learn from its mistakes and experiences. While many rules implicitly aimed for this through negative
constraints ("never ever do . . . "), some users attempted to arrange an explicit mechanism for knowledge retention, such
as having the agent maintain a "lessons learned" document.
        At the end of every task, or upon making an error,
        you **MUST** update the `lessons\_learned.md` file.
        This is not optional. . .
        This process is essential for self-correction and knowledge retention.
10                                         Tao Dong, Harini Sampath, Ja Young Lee, Sherry Y. Shi, and Andrew Macvean


     The above collaborative protocols defined in agent rules suggest a sophisticated interplay of user needs:

        • Mitigate the Risks: The demands for planning, transparency, and seeking help are primarily risk-mitigation
          strategies. Users are concerned about agents performing destructive or incorrect actions without oversight and
          use these human-in-the-loop checkpoints to maintain control.
        • Reduce Cognitive Load: Efficient communication and the ability to learn from feedback are aimed at making
          the agent easier to manage. Conversational fluff is perceived as noise that slows down human guidance, while
          having to repeat corrections is a source of frustration.
        • Elicit Agency: Beyond simply preventing errors, some rules aim to leverage the agent’s reasoning capabilities.
          By encouraging the agent to challenge requests, analyze trade-offs, and identify ambiguity, users are prompting
          the agent to exercise its “agency,” though often within specified limits.

3.2.5    Interplay between Expectations of Agent Behavior. Our analysis reveals that the four core behavioral
expectations—Adhering to Standards, Ensuring Quality, Solving Problems Effectively, and Collaborating with the
User—do not operate in isolation but rather form a tightly integrated system. This interplay highlights a sophisticated
user desire for bounded agency in AI agents, where autonomy is exercised within defined constraints to achieve a
holistic standard of code quality.
     Firstly, the expectation to adhere to standards and processes operationalizes quality in an enterprise setting through
codified style guides and project conventions. This adherence is not always fully automated; some rules define a
collaborative workflow where the agent performs tasks up to a certain point, then hands off to the user for human
intervention or specialized tool access, as seen in the two-step process for defining experimentation flags.

        So defining the flag id is a two step process:
        1. Define the flag with a placeholder id which the <tool name> tool
        can recognize. For example: <code>
        2. Ask the user to run the "<command for an experimentation tool>" command.
        That tool will replace the placeholder with a unique flag identifier.

     Secondly, the heuristics for solving problems effectively provide the procedural guardrails necessary to achieve quality
safely and efficiently. The emphasis on incremental work and proactive validation creates a tight feedback loop, ensuring
quality is integrated from the outset rather than being an afterthought. This desire for a proactive, reasoning agent
might seem to contrast with strict process adherence. However, it reflects a nuanced demand for agents to exercise
their reasoning capabilities within the specific constraints of the project’s context, standards, and problem-solving
heuristics. Rules requiring agents to state applicable guidelines and initiate proactive context retrieval before revising a
plan illustrate this balance.

        **after every user prompt your very first output must be**:


        1. State which guidelines are applicable with reasoning,
        and what you will do to follow them.
        2. Initiate `Proactive Context Retrieval`.
        Then based on the context, EXPLICITLY STATE your revised plan
        and the reasoning behind revision.
From Correctness to Collaboration: Toward a Human-Centered Framework for Evaluating AI Agent Behavior in
Software Engineering                                                                                                                   11

    Finally, the expectation to collaborate with the user, including collaborative planning, trade-off analysis, and learning
from feedback, ensures the agent to align the quality of its work with the user’s deeper, often under-stated, goals. The
heuristics for effective problem-solving, such as "Work Incrementally" and "Validate Work Proactively," are deeply
complementary with collaborative expectations. They establish specific protocols that structure human-agent interaction,
creating natural breakpoints for user review and guidance.


4     Study 2: Aspirational Agent Behavior at the Junior Developer Level
While the taxonomy of agent behavior developed through Study 1 is immediately applicable to an enterprise software
engineering context, these findings reflect a pragmatic view, shaped by developers’ perceived capabilities and limitations
of current LLMs. To ensure the next generations of LLMs progress against the true user need for a highly-intelligent
partner in software engineering, we must define a more aspirational target. This requires shifting our focus from
current expectations of coding agents to the enduring principles of software engineering, as articulated by experienced
practitioners.


4.1    Methods
For the aforementioned purpose, we conducted semi-structured interviews with 15 experienced software engineers who
frequently used AI agents for work from the same large technology company (see demographics information in Figure
1). We situated our interview protocol in areas of professional growth expected of junior developers as they become
seasoned practitioners. Our choice of anchoring our inquiry to expectations of junior developers is an intentional
response to the popular framing of AI agents in industry headlines that they could already act like junior software
developers2 .
    Each interview included two main segments: 1) a mindmapping exercise aimed at eliciting the participant’s view of
what constitutes core values and principles in software engineering, often drawing from their own professional journey,
and 2) a discussion about how junior developers and AI agents would respectively measure up to these stated ideals.
Two of the co-authors conducted thematic analysis on the interview transcripts, informed by the codebook developed
from analyzing the agent rules in Study 1.


4.2    Findings
We found that the expected areas of growth for junior developers are generally aligned with the expectations of
(and hopes for) AI agents expressed in agent rules today. For example, participants emphasized the importance of
prioritizing code quality over the speed of coding, and believed the key to achieve high code quality is to employ sound
problem-solving approaches, such as thinking holistically and making incremental changes, as well as collaborating
with others effectively, especially through design and code reviews.
    Nonetheless, a crucial difference is that junior developers are expected to take initiatives in their own growth through
seeking help and asking questions, observing team workflows and norms, and learning from feedback through both
formal reviews and informal discussions with colleagues. For instance, P1 shared a particular mindset he benefited
when he was in earlier stages of his career:


2 Goldman Sachs deploys AI software engineer Devin to transform tech roles. https://www.hrkatha.com/news/goldman-sachs-deploys-ai-software-
engineer-devin-to-transform-tech-roles/
12                                         Tao Dong, Harini Sampath, Ja Young Lee, Sherry Y. Shi, and Andrew Macvean




Fig. 1. The majority of the 15 developers in our interview study had more than 6 years of professional experience, and the majority
use AI agents for their professional work every day. In addition, the majority of our participants supervised or mentored junior
software developers multiple times in their respective careers.




     “I think one of the things I’ve learned is. . . always make sure that you actually understand the code that you’re reading
and the technical changes. And don’t be afraid to ask other engineers or challenge why the code was written that way. Don’t
make assumptions that it’s already correct or that it should be intuitive.” - P1
     And P10 emphasized the tacit knowledge that needs to be acquired through interacting with team members:
     “There is some sort of team norm (about coding patterns) that needs to be learned over time or through talking to the
senior people on the team.” - P10
     In contrast, participants expected AI agents to perform as is, and any seeming improvements of capabilities over
the baseline would require active guidance from the user through prompt and context engineering. Therefore, this
metacognitive and self-improving capability sets apart human capabilities from AI’s, and should be an important
consideration when defining and benchmarking against AGI. In the rest of this section, we elaborate on each of the core
values junior developers are expected to adopt as they grow, and how the expectations differ when directed towards
junior developers and AI agents.

4.2.1 Ensuring Code Quality. This is the value that many of our participants considered to be paramount. Participants
described “quality” code as code that is correct, readable, maintainable, and thoroughly tested. Participants think of
code quality as the social practice of communicating and collaborating with "future engineers" (P1) like "someone who
doesn’t work at [Company Name] yet" (P9). In that sense, high-quality code—through its readability, comments, and
documentation—is a form of asynchronous communication. Tests were described as a "second tier of documentation"
(P4) for future engineers.
     “I would say if we don’t pay attention to the quality over time, it’s gonna bite you back. ... because people come and go,
you know, ... some people may have this knowledge and they’re gone and we just totally lose that piece. And when we run
into something like that, it would take much longer for a team member to figure that out." - P7
     Participants did not anticipate junior developers would appreciate the importance of code quality immediately. They
acknowledged that this is an area of initial struggle and eventual growth. Participants expected junior engineers to
internalize the mindset of quality first through mentorship, typically iterating on their code via the code review process,
and overall building empathy for the reader of their code.
From Correctness to Collaboration: Toward a Human-Centered Framework for Evaluating AI Agent Behavior in
Software Engineering                                                                                                                 13

     “There is a tendency for earlier (in their career) developers to get the thing done, and that’s it ... their first draft is usually
their final draft. ... I think the first thing I try to, you know, work with them is ‘let’s iterate.’ Do your own first code review,
right? Take off your code author hat and put on a code reviewer hat.” - P6
     On the other hand, an AI agent is still viewed as a tool, despite their potential to become a partner, to which tedious
quality tasks (like generating unit tests) can be offloaded immediately and at scale, with no learning curve required.
     “I think AI does a very good job of writing unit tests... normally if I had to write a unit test on my own completely, it’ll
take like a lot of time” - P10

4.2.2    Adhering to Standards and Processes. Closely related to code quality, participants viewed “internalizing”
and adhering to team and organization-wide standards, both explicitly documented best practices as well as implicit
“team habits” as an important trait. Adherence to standards enables order and predictability in a large, multi-person
codebase, which in turn ensures that the codebase remains maintainable over time.
     “It’s not just about the functionality, but also overall readability and whether it aligns with the rest of how [Company
Name] writes this piece of code” - P6
     Much like in the case of code quality, participants viewed this as a trait that junior developers would acquire through
learning from documentation and more importantly, acting on feedback from code reviews. Junior developers are
expected to learn both the documented standards and unwritten, implicit ones embedded in the team’s culture.
     “A lot of it is done in the (code) review process. . . My tech lead pointed me to the internal [Company Name] C++
documentation to follow like [Company Name] style practice." - P1
     In contrast, they expected AI agents to automate adherence to standards. For example, a coding agent who can
rewrite any code to match the standards of surrounding code:
     "So what I did was I basically used <Agent Name> to say, rewrite what I’ve done, but in the style of the rest of this file." -
P9
     Still, some participants were disappointed that AI agents were not yet able to learn what standards and rules should
be enforced based on a project’s context and an individual’s past work. For example, P2 wanted an agent that can learn
from his past code reviews and enforce similar standards in future review requests.
     “The AI could learn from this, [including] 1500 CLs (change lists) I reviewed and what comments I provided, and act on
the new CLs.” - P2.

4.2.3    Solving Problems Effectively. Beyond writing good code, a key trait that participants identified as key to
being an effective developer was to adopt the right methods for problem solving, including understanding both technical
and business requirements, weighing tradeoffs, and considering long-term implications of a solution.
     For human developers, participants noted that strategic insight emerges from accumulated experience and a holistic
grasp of the system. Junior developers actively cultivate this comprehensive understanding through exploration,
diligently "reading team documents," conducting "reasonable research" (P3, P4), and learning incrementally from
working with the team over time.
     “Your level of understanding of the code base, right? kind of determines the code you can write... if you know more, like
you have more context over larger code base, then you know how to design some part of it” - P5
     For AI agents, any strategic output is attributed to a masterfully crafted prompt. The intelligence and strategic insight
originate with the human user; the AI functions merely as a tool to explore that strategy.
     “To me, AI is more of a tool, and so unless the user is thinking about these things first. I wouldn’t trust AI to do all of this
on behalf of the user yet.” - P14
14                                          Tao Dong, Harini Sampath, Ja Young Lee, Sherry Y. Shi, and Andrew Macvean


     Both AI and human developers share a common anti-pattern: an inclination to prematurely execute tasks. Junior
developers often face criticism for adhering too rigidly to the problem described on a ticket, failing to grasp the "bigger
picture" (P3). Similarly, AI agents exhibit a comparable shortcoming, executing prompts "without thinking about other
consequences" (P5). The critical distinction lies in how this narrowness is perceived: for junior developers, it represents
a remediable developmental phase, whereas for AI, it is viewed as an inherent technical limitation.
     "...what would make me comfortable is if it (AI) could, um, I think making the code changes is the easier part. If it could
also consider and show all the trade-offs it considered. - P6"

4.2.4    Collaborating with Others. Effective collaboration and communication was perceived as an important trait
to reduce misalignment and thus wasted work. Soliciting others’ feedback early in one’s problem solving process is
considered essential to teamwork:
     “Code reviews are sort of, that can be too late. ...somebody who has already spent a bunch of effort on a design. And at
that point, it’s hard to provide input necessarily into some of the choices that are made ... you’re going backwards.” - P12
     For junior developers, effective communication was viewed as a developmental journey, requiring them to overcome
a reluctance to seek assistance and internalize the understanding that software development is a collaborative endeavor.
The expectation was that they should proactively communicate both progress and impediments, avoiding work "in
a hole for three days” (P6), echoing the expectation that agents should also operate incrementally and iteratively. In
addition, junior developers were expected to demonstrate effective communication by adding adequate context in
CL descriptions to aid reviewers, as well as create more durable artifacts like documentation to enable asynchronous
communication.
     For AI Agents, proactive communication was required to transform its “black box” (P14) nature and build trust.
Participants expected that AI agents need to be explicitly designed for interactive dialog and transparent communication.
They expect agents to explain the reasoning behind suggestions and changes as well as proactively identify knowledge
gaps and ask clarifying questions, even presenting tradeoffs.
     “ I would expect more of a conversation like [interaction] - here’s the problem, here’s [how] I would test it... but there was
no such conversation [with AI].” - P1
     “It needs to be able to figure out when it doesn’t have enough information and ask... It’s gonna be more of an interaction
versus like correction... I expected it to say something. ‘Oh, like I have these two possible scenarios... these are the trade offs
for left and right... what would you recommend?’” - P3

4.2.5    Learn from Feedback and Past Experiences. Closely related to being an effective collaborator, is being able
to learn from feedback and past experiences. This proactive effort on part of the junior developer or AI greatly improves
continuity and efficiency: the senior developer doesn’t have to explain the context again, provide the same feedback
again, or fix the same bugs as before.
     Effective collaboration is intrinsically linked to the ability to learn from feedback and prior interactions. Exhibiting
this behavior, whether by a junior developer or an AI agent, enhances efficiency and outcomes of teamwork, alleviating
the need for senior developers to repeatedly re-explain context, reiterate feedback, or re-address recurring issues.
     For junior developers, participants perceived learning from feedback as an active engagement with the code review
process, necessitating an openness to constructive criticism ("hard for your ego to just say, ’Oh, good idea’" - P3). For
Agents, learning from feedback was closely related to retaining context and personalizing suggestions based on a user’s
past actions.
From Correctness to Collaboration: Toward a Human-Centered Framework for Evaluating AI Agent Behavior in
Software Engineering                                                                                                             15

   Participants in the study acknowledged the potential for AI to be more than a just a tool and an effective partner,
given it has already been trained on the organization’s code base, but lamented that AI’s stateless manner, as in its
inability to remember the "conversation leading up to" the current moment and learn from past interactions, could
make it a forgettable partner.
   “...I would make changes here just fixing bugs. Then if I added any other prompt. It would reproduce the old bug as
opposed to taking into account the fact that I changed the code." - P13

4.3   Introducing the Time Horizon Axis of the CAB Framework




Fig. 2. The Context-Adaptive Behavior (CAB) Framework extends the taxonomy of desirable agent behaviors developed for an
enterprise setting along two empirically-derived axes. The Time Horizon axis maps the evolution from current needs to future ideals.
The Type of Work axis reveals how expectations change when shifting from production-grade engineering to exploratory development.
Text in green with a plus sign indicates expected behaviors unique in its quadrant. Text in gray with a downward arrow represents an
expectation less prominent compared to the “Enterprise Production” base line.



   To sum up, we found that while engineers expect both junior developers and AI agents to adhere to the same core
values of software engineering, the crucial distinction lies in the expectation of growth. Junior developers are expected
to be proactive, self-directed learners who internalize feedback and improve over time, whereas AI agents are perceived
as static tools that require explicit, continuous guidance from the user to perform better.
16                                        Tao Dong, Harini Sampath, Ja Young Lee, Sherry Y. Shi, and Andrew Macvean


     Based on these findings, we propose the Time Horizon axis of our Context-Adaptive Behavior Framework (see the
top two quadrants in Figure 2), extending the near-term user expectations of agent behavior captured in the taxonomy
presented in Study 1. This axis illustrates the progression from a competent but dependent tool to a junior partner
with both a growth mindset and an aptitude to improve continuously. The "Aspirational" end of the axis is thus defined
by the emergence of metacognitive capabilities: the ability to learn from experience, proactively seek knowledge, and
demonstrate a deep, internalized understanding of a project’s context and standards, much like a human developer is
expected to.
     In the following section, we describe how we derived the Type of Work axis of the framework through examining
user prompts for an AI-powered prototyping tool.


5     Study 3: Expected Agent Behavior for AI-Driven Prototyping
To investigate how agent behavior ought to adapt across diverse work contexts, we analyzed user prompts within an AI-
driven application prototyping environment. This prototyping tool, developed by the same technology company involved
in our initial two studies, attracts developers who primarily explore new application ideas through conversational
interactions with an agent. The technical backgrounds of these developers are more varied than the enterprise developers
involved in our first two studies, ranging from seasoned full-stack engineers to hobbyists with minimal coding experience,
all of whom aim to rapidly iterate on their concepts through conversing with a prototyping agent. This study, therefore,
aims to define the "Type of Work" axis within the Context-Adaptive Behavior (CAB) Framework, shedding light on how
expected AI agent behaviors both generalize and evolve as tasks shift from production-grade engineering to UI-focused
new product exploration.


5.1    Method
Users in this prototyping environment instruct the agent through iterative, conversational prompts. While a mechanism
for defining agent rules does exist, it is cumbersome and rarely used in this context. Therefore, prompts sent to the
prototyping agent served as the primary source for understanding this user group’s expectations of agent behavior.
     We took a random sample of 1,000 users who had engaged with the agent at least 10 times in July 2025. From this
group, we randomly selected 1,000 prompts. We then used a multi-step, LLM-assisted workflow (using one of the
frontier reasoning LLMs) to analyze and categorize these prompts.

      (1) Filtering: First, the LLM classified whether each prompt described a preferred agent behavior (e.g., a process or
          an approach) rather than just a direct task instruction. This yielded a core dataset of 488 prompts.
      (2) Clustering: Next, we used the LLM to cluster these 488 prompts by distinct behavioral expectations of the user.
          Two co-authors manually reviewed the clustering results and refined them into 13 themes.
      (3) Classification: Finally, we used the 13 refined themes to classify the 488 prompts. One of the co-authors
          independently annotated a subset of prompts (n=25) to validate the LLM’s classification accuracy and found a
          strong F1-score of 83% (Precision: 81%; Recall: 85%).


5.2    Findings
In the rest of this section, we focus on the similarities and differences between the expected agent behaviors implied in
user prompts and those found in the agent rules analysis.
From Correctness to Collaboration: Toward a Human-Centered Framework for Evaluating AI Agent Behavior in
Software Engineering                                                                                                        17

5.2.1 Expectations Similar between Enterprise Software Development and Rapid Prototyping. There’s a set
of behavioral expectations that seem to apply to both settings, though often expressed differently:
        • Adhere to Standards and Processes: Users often instruct the agent to follow best practices at a high level,
          such as, “Make sure to follow best practices for data and web application security” or “Ensure consistent naming
          conventions, data types, and required fields for all data points that will be used for analytics.” Users also specify
          how to perform a specific task and provide step-by-step plans. For example, users would enter “now perform the
          steps that you came up with in your last answer” to remind the tool of previously established plans, or enter
          instructions themselves, such as "here are the exact steps you should take to troubleshoot and resolve this issue."
        • Ensure Code Quality: In the prototyping setting, the range of rules imposed for prototyping outcome ranged
          from strict (e.g., “Layout must follow best practices for mobile-first design: Top padding, clean safe margins, Max
          readability, Responsive layout”) to open-ended (e.g., “build a user friendly app”, “review the entire codebase again
          from the perspective of a professional coder and search for any inefficiencies, redundancies or unprofessional code
          that could be improved”).
        • Collaborate with the User: In both types of work, users expect the agent to engage in collaborative planning.
          This is evident in prompts that invite the prototyping agent to brainstorm, assess task difficulty, or ask for
          clarification, such as:
            – “what else do you think we should add?”
            – “Good idea, don’t make it too dominant but I like the thinking here. You can implement this strategy in multiple
               phases, if it means for a better output?”
            – “If something is unclear, request clarification rather than assuming.”
        • Solve Problems based on Context: Like developers in the enterprise setting, users of this prototyping agent
          expected AI to acquire and apply knowledge from its context. For example, some users asked the agent to look
          back into the conversation history, “Examine our recent prompt history and think very deeply about a solution
          that isn’t something we already tried.” Others requested the agent to review the project context, “based on the
          context of our project as defined in the docs/rules.md, docs/schemas.md, readme.md and openapi.yaml files, how
          would you make this plan more robust?”
        • Validate Work Proactively and Learn from Feedback: When users experience regression and persistent
          failures, they try to address it with a reactive prompt with expression of frustration (e.g., "why do you always
          make the same mistake?"). The underlying expectation is to “validate work proactively,” and “learn from
          feedback and past experience.”

5.2.2    Expectations More Prominent for Rapid Prototyping. We also observed a set of user expectations that
appear to be more prominent in the rapid prototyping setting than enterprise software engineering:
        • Act as Experts: A common pattern in prompting the prototyping agent is the direction to assume the role
          of an expert. Examples include: “You are the best UI designer and your designs are loved by GenZ”, “You are a
          skilled game designer with extensive experience in creating immersive 3D car racing games.”, and "You are an expert
          full-stack developer.” This prompting style represents the most abstract form of behavioral guidance, suggesting
          some users may lack the expertise to provide concrete guidance. Invoking an expert persona might have been a
          workaround to elicit desirable behaviors they are not able to articulate.
        • Focus on UI/UX Quality: While agent rules in the enterprise center on code health (reliability, maintainability,
          performance), the prompts for prototyping show a strong focus on the quality of visual and UI design. Users
18                                          Tao Dong, Harini Sampath, Ja Young Lee, Sherry Y. Shi, and Andrew Macvean


          provide high-level guidance such as "make it significantly more modern and minimalist" or "like Apple’s design,"
          in addition to specific task instructions (“change the purple color to a dark navy blue”).
        • Provide Explanation: Users frequently ask the agent to explain and clarify the agent’s plans and actions. This
          happens when they are in a collaborative planning mode (e.g., “Think deeply about the implementation, and
          explain the approach.”) and when they want to gain insights into the agent’s decisions (“so help me understand
          the logic, if is not logged in it will be redirected to homepage?”). Some requests for explanation also reflect a desire
          to learn. For example, users would ask, “how can that be implemented, or is that a possible upgrade to add later
          on” or “It’s working, explain how you went from genkit to fetch? What’s the difference?”. This signals varying
          levels of technical expertise of users and a pedagogical need not as present in the enterprise setting.

5.2.3    Expectations Less Prominent in Rapid Prototyping. Ensure Code Quality: User prompts for the pro-
totyping agent included fewer explicit requirements on code quality than the enterprise agent rules did. This is not
surprising given the differences between the two settings. Nonetheless, users in this setting still have quality concerns
over the agent’s work. While their primary focus is on the UI/UX quality (e.g., “Layout must follow best practices for
mobile-first design: Top padding, clean safe margins, Max readability, Responsive layout”), some users requested the agent
to improve the health of their code: “review the entire codebase again from the perspective of a professional coder and
search for any inefficiencies, redundancies or unprofessional code that could be improved.”


5.3     Reflecting on Our Observations
The analysis of user prompts for the rapid prototyping agent confirms that the core behavioral expectations codified in
the enterprise agent rules are broadly applicable. However, these expectations manifest with varying levels of strength
and specificity across these two distinct settings of software development. We updated the top-right quadrant of the
CAB Framework (Figure 2) accordingly to reflect these nuanced differences.
     Two primary factors seem to be behind the differences in desirable agent behavior we observed. To begin with, the
user base for rapid prototyping is more diverse, encompassing both professional and casual developers. This variance
in user expertise might have led to different ways they articulate their expectations of the agent. The underlying
purpose of the code also significantly influences the prompt language. While a fundamental desire for quality persists,
work with the prototyping agent often prioritizes idea exploration, rapid iteration, and immediate functionality over
high-stakes production deployments. Consequently, users employ less formal and more indirect expressions to convey
their underlying expectations. This observation highlights the necessity for an agent evaluation framework to recognize
and adapt to these implicit, informally articulated user needs.


6     Discussions
6.1     The Evolving Mental Model of AI Agents
Our work highlights an evolving mental model of AI agents in software engineering: the simultaneous perception of AI
as both a powerful tool and a potential collaborative partner. This perception manifests in several key ways, influencing
how users interact with and evaluate these agents.
     First, the varying abstraction levels of agent rules reveal this evolution of mental models directly. In Study 1, users
provided both high-level principles and highly specific, step-by-step directives. The former suggests a desire for a
partner capable of autonomous reasoning and adherence to broad guidelines, while the latter treats the agent as a tool
From Correctness to Collaboration: Toward a Human-Centered Framework for Evaluating AI Agent Behavior in
Software Engineering                                                                                                      19

that requires precise instructions to execute tasks. This duality underscores the current stage of AI development, where
agents demonstrate advanced inference capabilities but still require explicit, step-by-step guidance in certain contexts.
  Furthermore, our findings from Study 2 suggest that developers appreciate the fact that AI agents often possess
superhuman breadth of knowledge, but at the same time they are acutely aware of their shortcomings in areas such as
self-improvement and learning on the job, which is in contrast to their expectations of other developers, even junior
ones.
  Finally, the user’s perception of their own expertise likely shapes their perceived relationship with the AI. In Study 3,
when users perceive themselves to be less knowledgeable than the AI agent, they tend to adopt a "partner" mindset,
expecting the AI to act as a tutor or expert, expressed in role-playing commands (e.g., "You are the best UI designer and
your designs are loved by GenZ"). Conversely, when users perceive a significant expertise advantage of their own over
the AI, as shown in Study 1, they revert to using the AI more as a sophisticated tool or a junior partner at the best. This
suggests that the "tool vs. partner" dynamic is not inherent to the AI itself, but rather a fluid construct influenced by the
user’s context and self-perception.

6.2     Implications for Improving Agent Evaluation
To effectively evaluate the progression from AI-as-a-tool to AI-as-a-partner, our taxonomy of desirable agent behaviors
and the Context-Adaptive Behavior (CAB) Framework offer a human-centered foundation for enhancing our toolbox of
evaluation techniques.
  Qualitative Assessment of Agent Behavior: Our framework enables a more nuanced qualitative assessment of
agent behavior. By leveraging techniques like "Report Cards" [32], each behavior within our taxonomy can be treated
as a "Skill." Human subject-matter experts or well-calibrated LLM-as-a-Judge can then assess agent trajectories and
code output against specific guidelines for each skill, providing a grade and qualitative assessment. This moves beyond
functional correctness to capture the interactive and collaborative qualities essential for partnership.
  In-Product User Feedback: The behavioral taxonomy can directly structure in-product feedback interfaces, leading
to more precise and actionable insights. If a user has defined agent rules, the feedback UI can be tailored to align
the general taxonomy with their specific rules, focusing on behaviors relevant to the current session. This allows for
targeted feedback on how well the agent is performing as a partner in real-world scenarios.
  Up-leveling Error Analysis to Behavioral Analysis: Our taxonomy provides a crucial foundation for future work
in up-leveling error analysis to behavioral analysis. While this paper introduces the behavioral attributes, developing
a hierarchical analytical framework that can attribute high-level behavioral deficits to low-level system errors and
limitations is a significant next step. This will allow for a more comprehensive understanding of agent shortcomings
and guide targeted improvements, moving beyond mechanistic failures to human-centric behavioral analysis.

6.3     Implications for Improving Agent Design
Our analysis also highlights key areas for improving agent behavior to foster more effective human-AI partnerships.
  Memory and Personalization: A significant limitation of current AI agents, as observed in our studies, is their
often stateless nature. This hinders their ability to learn from past interactions and adapt to individual user preferences,
leading to frustration and the need for repeated corrections. Developing robust mechanisms for persistent memory and
personalized learning will be essential for agents to evolve into truly adaptive and trustworthy partners.
  Communication and Collaboration Tooling: Agent-to-user communication is often limited to a chat box interface.
To truly act as partners, agents need to be better equipped to communicate their reasoning, explain complex decisions,
20                                        Tao Dong, Harini Sampath, Ja Young Lee, Sherry Y. Shi, and Andrew Macvean


and provide transparent updates on their progress, but also to seek clarification when uncertain, both in synchronous
and asynchronous collaborations with humans.This raises the question of providing agents with more access to existing
human-to-human communication and collaborative work infrastructure, such as emails, issue trackers, and online
collaborative documents, to enable more seamless integration into team workflows.
     Meta-Cognition Support: Empowering agents with meta-cognitive capabilities will elevate them from task executors
to strategic partners. Key aspects of meta-cognition support for agents could include:

       • Plan: Before starting a task, the agent can strategize the best way to approach it according to knowledge about
          its own strengths and weaknesses, based on prior evaluation results, as well as the complexity of the task.
       • Monitor: While performing the task, the agent can pause and assess its own execution traces and identify any
          difficulties or gaps in its knowledge.
       • Evaluate: After completing the task, the agent can reflect on its performance and save the results of such a
          self-assessment in the agent’s memory system, leveraged for future tasks.

     “Over-the-Shoulder” Learning: To match the self-improving capacity of junior developers, as Study 2 suggests, AI
agents need to learn from observing how their human partners perform tasks, in a manner similar to “over-the-shoulder
learning”[28]. This involves developing mechanisms for agents to passively human workflows, identify patterns, and
internalize best practices, thereby acquiring tacit knowledge that is often difficult to codify in explicit rules.

6.4    Implications for Supporting Human Supervisors of AI Agents
Finally, supporting users who supervise AI agents is a critical, often overlooked, aspect of fostering effective human-AI
collaboration. This includes developing:
     Agent Rule Validators: Tools that help users iteratively test and refine their agent rules against their own use cases
can be considered as project-specific agent evaluations. This capability enables users to fine-tune agent behavior for
optimal performance within their unique workflows and project requirements, ensuring that agents act as effective and
reliable partners.
     Agent Rule Discovery and Adaptation: Enabling agent rule discovery can empower users to learn successful
strategies from their peers and subsequently adapt validated rules to their unique contexts. This fosters a community of
practice for agent customization.
     Agent Profile: Providing users with clear "agent profiles" that detail an agent’s evaluated behavioral strengths and
weaknesses can help users calibrate their trust and focus their rule authoring effort on specific types of agent behavior
that require explicit guidance

7     Limitations
Our research, while offering valuable insights, has certain limitations. Firstly, the data for both Study 1 (agent rules)
and Study 2 (interview data) were collected exclusively from a single large technology company. While this allows
for in-depth analysis within a specific context, it may limit the generalizability of our findings to other organizational
settings, company cultures, or industries. Future research could benefit from a broader sample across diverse companies
to validate and expand upon our observations.
     Secondly, the "Type of Work" axis in our Context-Adaptive Behavior (CAB) Framework is not exhaustive. We
specifically focused on two distinct types of software engineering work: enterprise software development and rapid
prototyping. While these two represent significantly different purposes and user expertise levels, thus effectively
From Correctness to Collaboration: Toward a Human-Centered Framework for Evaluating AI Agent Behavior in
Software Engineering                                                                                                                                 21

demonstrating the generalizability of our behavioral taxonomy for software engineering agents and the utility of the
CAB framework, other types of software engineering work (e.g., embedded systems development, data science projects,
game development) were not included. Exploring these additional work types in future studies would further refine and
strengthen the comprehensive applicability of our framework.


8   Conclusions
Our work addresses a critical evaluation gap in the evolving landscape of AI agents for software engineering. Our core
contributions include a foundational taxonomy of desirable AI agent behaviors for enterprise software engineering,
derived from a qualitative analysis of 91 agent configurations, and the emerging Context-Adaptive Behavior (CAB)
Framework for extending the taxonomy to different Types of Work and Time Horizons of AI advancements. The
taxonomy defines four key expectations of agent behavior: Adhere to Standards and Processes, Ensure Code Quality
and Reliability, Solving Problems Effectively, and Collaborating with the User, providing a systematic vocabulary for
understanding effective agent partnership. Together, our taxonomy and framework provide a robust, human-centered
foundation for assessing true collaborative intelligence in AI agents, guiding future research and development towards
more effective and trustworthy human-AI partnerships.


9   GenAI Usage Disclosure
Throughout this paper, GenAI tools were utilized for copy editing. Additionally, these tools assisted with data analysis,
as detailed in the pertinent study sections. The co-authors have reviewed the GenAI output for accuracy and deem any
potential errors acceptable given the qualitative nature of our analyses.


References
 [1] Jacob Austin, Augustus Odena, Maxwell Nye, Maarten Bosma, Henryk Michalewski, David Dohan, Ellen Jiang, Carrie Cai, Michael Terry, Quoc Le,
     et al. 2021. Program synthesis with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07732 (2021). https://arxiv.org/abs/2108.07732
 [2] John W Ayers, Adam Poliak, Mark Dredze, Eric C Leas, Zechariah Zhu, Jessica B Kelley, Dennis J Faix, Aaron M Goodman, Christopher A Longhurst,
     Michael Hogarth, et al. 2023. Comparing physician and artificial intelligence chatbot responses to patient questions posted to a public social media
     forum. JAMA Internal Medicine 183, 6 (2023), 589–596. doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2023.1838
 [3] Andrew Begel and Nachiappan Nagappan. 2008. Pair programming: what’s in it for me?. In Proceedings of the Second ACM-IEEE international
     symposium on Empirical software engineering and measurement. 120–128.
 [4] Aider blog. 2024. o1 tops aider’s new polyglot leaderboard: The polyglot benchmark. https://aider.chat/2024/12/21/polyglot.html#the-polyglot-
     benchmark
 [5] Islem Bouzenia and Michael Pradel. 2025. Understanding Software Engineering Agents: A Study of Thought-Action-Result Trajectories. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2506.18824 (2025). https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.18824
 [6] Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique P. de O. Pinto, Jared Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg
     Brockman, et al. 2021. Evaluating large language models trained on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374 (2021). https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.03374
 [7] Darshan Deshpande, Varun Gangal, Hersh Mehta, Jitin Krishnan, Anand Kannappan, and Rebecca Qian. 2025. TRAIL: Trace Reasoning and Agentic
     Issue Localization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.08638 (2025). https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.08638
 [8] Collin Green, Ciera Jaspan, Maggie Hodges, and Jessica Lin. 2024. Developer Productivity for Humans, Part 7: Software Quality. IEEE Software 41, 1
     (2024), 25–30. doi:10.1109/MS.2023.3324830
 [9] Hojae Han, seung-won hwang, Rajhans Samdani, and Yuxiong He. 2025. ConvCodeWorld: Benchmarking Conversational Code Generation in
     Reproducible Feedback Environments. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations. https://openreview.net/forum?id=
     rpouyo09V0
[10] Michael Hewner and Mark Guzdial. 2010. What game developers look for in a new graduate: interviews and surveys at one game company. In
     Proceedings of the 41st ACM technical symposium on Computer science education. 275–279.
[11] Naman Jain, King Han, Alex Gu, Wen-Ding Li, Fanjia Yan, Tianjun Zhang, Sida Wang, Armando Solar-Lezama, Koushik Sen, and Ion Stoica. 2025.
     LiveCodeBench: Holistic and Contamination Free Evaluation of Large Language Models for Code. In The Thirteenth International Conference on
     Learning Representations (ICLR 2025). https://openreview.net/forum?id=chfJJYC3iL original arXiv:2403.07974.
22                                                Tao Dong, Harini Sampath, Ja Young Lee, Sherry Y. Shi, and Andrew Macvean


[12] Carlos E. Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and Karthik Narasimhan. 2024. SWE-bench: Can Language
     Models Resolve Real-world GitHub Issues?. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR 2024). https://openreview.net/
     forum?id=VTF8yNQM66 original arXiv:2310.06770.
[13] Irina Jurenka, Markus Kunesch, Kevin R. McKee, Daniel Gillick, Shaojian Zhu, Sara Wiltberger, Shubham Milind Phal, Katherine Hermann, Daniel
     Kasenberg, Avishkar Bhoopchand, Ankit Anand, Miruna Pîslar, Stephanie Chan, Lisa Wang, Jennifer She, Parsa Mahmoudieh, Aliya Rysbek, Wei-Jen
     Ko, Andrea Huber, Brett Wiltshire, Gal Elidan, Roni Rabin, Jasmin Rubinovitz, Amit Pitaru, Mac McAllister, Julia Wilkowski, David Choi, Roee
     Engelberg, Lidan Hackmon, Adva Levin, Rachel Griffin, Michael Sears, Filip Bar, Mia Mesar, Mana Jabbour, Arslan Chaudhry, James Cohan, Sridhar
     Thiagarajan, Nir Levine, Ben Brown, Dilan Gorur, Svetlana Grant, Rachel Hashimshoni, Laura Weidinger, Jieru Hu, Dawn Chen, Kuba Dolecki, Canfer
     Akbulut, Maxwell Bileschi, Laura Culp, Wen-Xin Dong, Nahema Marchal, Kelsie Van Deman, Hema Bajaj Misra, Michael Duah, Moran Ambar, Avi
     Caciularu, Sandra Lefdal, Chris Summerfield, James An, Pierre-Alexandre Kamienny, Abhinit Mohdi, Theofilos Strinopoulous, Annie Hale, Wayne
     Anderson, Luis C. Cobo, Niv Efron, Muktha Ananda, Shakir Mohamed, Maureen Heymans, Zoubin Ghahramani, Yossi Matias, Ben Gomes, and Lila
     Ibrahim. 2024. Towards Responsible Development of Generative AI for Education: An Evaluation-Driven Approach. arXiv:2407.12687 [cs.CY]
     https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.12687
[14] Sungmin Kang, Juyeon Yoon, and Shin Yoo. 2023. Large language models are few-shot testers: Exploring LLM-based general bug reproduction. In
     2023 IEEE/ACM 45th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE). IEEE, 2312–2323. doi:10.1109/ICSE48619.2023.00194
[15] Aayush Kumar, Yasharth Bajpai, Sumit Gulwani, Gustavo Soares, and Emerson Murphy-Hill. 2025. Sharp Tools: How Developers Wield Agentic AI
     in Real Software Engineering Tasks. arXiv e-prints (2025), arXiv:2506.12347. https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.12347 Microsoft Research publication /
     arXiv — no separate peer-reviewed venue found.
[16] Paul Luo Li, Amy J Ko, and Andrew Begel. 2020. What distinguishes great software engineers? Empirical Software Engineering 25, 1 (2020), 322–352.
[17] Yahan Li, Jifan Yao, John Bosco S Bunyi, Adam C Frank, Angel Hwang, and Ruishan Liu. 2025. CounselBench: A Large-Scale Expert Evaluation and
     Adversarial Benchmark of Large Language Models in Mental Health Counseling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.08584 (2025). https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.
     08584
[18] Junwei Liu, Kaixin Wang, Yixuan Chen, Xin Peng, Zhenpeng Chen, Lingming Zhang, and Yiling Lou. 2024. Large language model-based agents for
     software engineering: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.02977 (2024). https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.02977
[19] Kaushal Kumar Maurya, KV Srivatsa, Kseniia Petukhova, and Ekaterina Kochmar. 2024. Unifying AI tutor evaluation: An evaluation taxonomy for
     pedagogical ability assessment of LLM-powered AI tutors. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.09416 (2024). https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.09416
[20] Xiangxin Meng, Zexiong Ma, Pengfei Gao, and Chao Peng. 2024. An empirical study on llm-based agents for automated bug fixing. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2411.10213 (2024). https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.10213
[21] Samuel Miserendino, Michele Wang, Tejal Patwardhan, and Johannes Heidecke. 2025. SWE-Lancer: Can Frontier LLMs Earn $1 Million from
     Real-World Freelance Software Engineering?. In Proceedings of the 2025 International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML 2025). https:
     //arxiv.org/abs/2502.12115 ICML 2025 (oral); arXiv:2502.12115.
[22] Stoyan Nikolov, Daniele Codecasa, Anna Sjövall, Maxim Tabachnyk, Satish Chandra, Siddharth Taneja, and Celal Ziftci. 2025. How is Google
     using AI for internal code migrations?. In 2025 IEEE/ACM 47th International Conference on Software Engineering: Software Engineering in Practice
     (ICSE-SEIP). https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.06972 conference paper; arXiv version available.
[23] Melissa Z Pan, Mert Cemri, Lakshya A Agrawal, Shuyi Yang, Bhavya Chopra, Rishabh Tiwari, Kurt Keutzer, Aditya Parameswaran, Kannan
     Ramchandran, Dan Klein, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Matei Zaharia, and Ion Stoica. 2025. Why Do Multiagent Systems Fail?. In ICLR 2025 Workshop on
     Building Trust in Language Models and Applications. https://openreview.net/forum?id=wM521FqPvI
[24] Pat Rondon, Renyao Wei, José Cambronero, Jürgen Cito, Aaron Sun, Siddhant Sanyam, Michele Tufano, and Satish Chandra. 2025. Evaluating
     agent-based program repair at Google. In 2025 IEEE/ACM 47th International Conference on Software Engineering: Software Engineering in Practice
     (ICSE-SEIP). doi:10.1109/ICSE-SEIP66354.2025.00038 arXiv preprint also available; accepted/presented at ICSE-SEIP 2025..
[25] Yao Shi, Rongkeng Liang, and Yong Xu. 2025. EducationQ: Evaluating LLMs’ Teaching Capabilities Through Multi-Agent Dialogue Framework.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.14928 (2025). https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.14928
[26] Wannita Takerngsaksiri, Chakkrit Tantithamthavorn, Micheal Fu, Jirat Pasuksmit, Kun Chen, and Ming Wu. 2025. Code readability in the age of
     large language models: An industrial case study from Atlassian. In IEEE International Conference on Software Maintenance and Evolution (ICSME)
     2025, Industry Track. https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.11264 arXiv preprint and ICSME 2025 Industry Track.
[27] Claire Taylor, Marie Huber, Qiao Ma, Rayven Plaza, Alison Chang, and Jie Chen. 2025. Software Development Is a Team Sport. IEEE Software 42, 03
     (May 2025), 13–17. doi:10.1109/MS.2025.3539403
[28] Michael Twidale. 2013. Over-The-Shoulder Learning: supporting brief informal learning embedded in the work context. Graduate School of Library and
     Information Science.
[29] Michael W Usrey and Kevin J Dooley. 1996. The dimensions of software quality. Quality Management Journal 3, 3 (1996), 67–86.
[30] Priyan Vaithilingam, Tianyi Zhang, and Elena L. Glassman. 2022. Expectation vs. experience: Evaluating the usability of code generation tools
     powered by large language models. In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems Extended Abstracts. 1–7. doi:10.1145/3491101.3519665
[31] Xingyao Wang, Zihan Wang, Jiateng Liu, Yangyi Chen, Lifan Yuan, Hao Peng, and Heng Ji. 2023. MINT: Evaluating LLMs in Multi-turn Interaction
     with Tools and Language Feedback. arXiv:2309.10691 [cs.CL]
[32] Blair Yang, Fuyang Cui, Keiran Paster, Jimmy Ba, Pashootan Vaezipoor, Silviu Pitis, and Michael R Zhang. 2024. Report cards: Qualitative evaluation
     of language models using natural language summaries. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.00844 (2024).
From Correctness to Collaboration: Toward a Human-Centered Framework for Evaluating AI Agent Behavior in
Software Engineering                                                                                                                            23

[33] John Yang, Akshara Prabhakar, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. 2023. Intercode: Standardizing and benchmarking interactive coding with
     execution feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36 (2023), 23826–23854. https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/
     2023/hash/4b175d846fb008d540d233c188379ff9-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.html
[34] Jiasheng Zheng, Boxi Cao, Zhengzhao Ma, Ruotong Pan, Hongyu Lin, Yaojie Lu, Xianpei Han, and Le Sun. 2024. Beyond correctness: Benchmarking
     multi-dimensional code generation for large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.11470 (2024). https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.11470
