                                            A Rubric-Supervised Critic from Sparse
                                            Real-World Outcomes
                                            Xingyao Wang1,3 , Valerie Chen2 , Heng Ji3 , Graham Neubig1,2

                                            {xingyao,graham}@openhands.dev
                                            1
                                                OpenHands, 2 CMU, 3 UIUC
                                            Academic benchmarks for coding agents tend to reward autonomous task completion, measured by
                                            verifiable rewards such as unit-test success. In contrast, real-world coding agents operate with humans
                                            in the loop, where success signals are typically noisy, delayed, and sparse. How can we bridge this gap?




arXiv:2603.03800v1 [cs.AI] 4 Mar 2026
                                            In this paper, we propose a process to learn a “critic” model from sparse and noisy interaction data,
                                            which can then be used both as a reward model for either RL-based training or inference-time scaling.
                                            Specifically, we introduce Critic Rubrics, a rubric-based supervision framework with 24 behavioral
                                            features that can be derived from human-agent interaction traces alone. Using a semi-supervised
                                            objective, we can then jointly predict these rubrics and sparse human feedback (when present). In
                                            experiments, we demonstrate that, despite being trained primarily from trace-observable rubrics and
                                            sparse real-world outcome proxies, these critics improve best-of-N reranking on SWE-bench (Best@8
                                            +15.9 over Random@8 over the rerankable subset of trajectories), enable early stopping (+17.7 with
                                            83% fewer attempts), and support training-time data curation via critic-selected trajectories.

                                            Critic Rubrics: https://github.com/OpenHands/critic-rubrics
                                            Model: https://huggingface.co/OpenHands/openhands-critic-4b-v1.0
                                            Docs: https://docs.openhands.dev/sdk/guides/critic




                                        1       Introduction
                                        Today, LLM-powered software engineering agents achieve strong performance on academic benchmarks (Jimenez
                                        et al., 2024) and are increasingly used by developers in real-world settings (Wang et al., 2025a; Anthropic,
                                        2025; Anysphere, 2024). However, benchmarks tend to reward autonomous task completion with verifiable
                                        rewards such as unit-test pass rates (Jimenez et al., 2024). In real use, the agent works with a human: users
                                        clarify intent over multiple turns, review diffs, edit code, and decide what to merge. As a result, success is
                                        not just “tests pass”, but whether the change is correct, reviewable, maintainable, and, most importantly,
                                        whether it meaningfully reduces the user’s work (Chen et al., 2025). To improve agents in this setting, we
                                        need to consider behavior in real-world human-agent interaction, not only from benchmarks or simulations.
                                        A first step to progress of any variety is measurement; building better interactive agents requires evaluators that
                                        can tell when the agent succeeded or failed in these settings. Evaluators, whether unit tests, human judgments,
                                        or learned models, allow for systematic benchmarking and A/B testing, provide supervision for agent training
                                        (e.g., reinforcement learning or filtered fine-tuning (Trung et al., 2024)), and enable inference-time scaling via
                                        best-of-K selection (Pan et al., 2025). In this work, we train a learned evaluator, or critic, that takes agent
                                        traces as input, and predicts a success value as the output, which can provide an actionable signal for manual
                                        iteration, training, or inference.
                                        However, building such a critic from human feedback is non-trivial; supervision in real-world human-agent
                                        interactions is sparse, delayed, and noisy. Feedback is sparse because users of real-world systems rarely provide



                                                                                                1
  Real-world User-Agent             Segments (Unit of work)                                                  Train critic model

                                                                          Dense critic rubrics

                                                                                                             (semi-supervised, multi-task)
         Interactions               user → agent actions → agent finish   24 rubric features


                                                                          covering 100% of data
                                                                                                             Predictions

                                                                                                              task success                              0.75




                                                                                                              rubric: misunderstood intention           0.   45
                                                     bash                                                                                               0.   21
                                                                                                              rubric: did not follow instruction


                                                                          Sparse outcomes
                    rubric: scope creep                       0.7   3

                                                     edit file                                                ...
                                                                          signals from deployed agent in

                                                          ...             production

                                                                                                             A  pplications
                                                                          e.g., pull request merge/closed,
                                                     finish                                                         Best of K reranking
                                                                          commit code survival, etc

                                                                                                                    Early Stopping
                                                                          covering 4-6% of data
                                                                                                                    Trajectory selection for data curation
              ...



Figure 1 Overview of our method: Learning a deployable critic from production traces. We convert
real-world human–agent interactions into segments (user request → agent actions → finish), annotate each segment
with trace-observable Critic Rubrics (24 dense behavioral signals), and combine them with sparse production outcome
proxies (e.g., PR merge / code survival) to train a semi-supervised, multi-task critic that predicts both rubric features
and segment success. The resulting critic supports best-of-K reranking, compute-efficient early stopping, and trajectory
selection for training-time data curation.

direct feedback on the quality of their interaction (Chen et al., 2025). It is delayed because, in the rare cases
of user feedback, it will typically come at the end of the interaction, not when the user first felt pleasure or
pain. This also causes the typical credit assignment problem in reinforcement learning – the final reward is
only a noisy approximation of whether any particular agent action is accurate.
To overcome this problem, we make several innovations in transforming human-agent interaction traces into
usable learning signals. First, we represent both benchmark traces and real-world interactions as segments:
minimal, self-contained units of work from a user request to task completion (Fig. 2; §2.2). Second, we
introduce critic rubrics for critic learning, instantiated as 24 behavioral features derived from the human-agent
interaction trace itself (e.g., “misunderstood intent”, “insufficient testing”, “user frustration”) that capture
common failure modes (§3). Rubrics are observable within each segment and can be annotated for all segments,
enabling a process-based supervision scheme applicable to both real-world and benchmark traces. Together,
these contributions enable semi-supervised critic training. We train a critic to jointly predict rubric features
and success probability: rubric prediction provides dense supervision across all 154K segments from real-world
production interactions, while the success head learns from code-survival labels available for only 4% of those
segments. This turns all 96% previously unlabeled segments into informative training data.
To demonstrate the efficacy of this approach, we first measure the quality of the learned critics themselves,
with several findings. First, real-world supervision is necessary: critics trained only on benchmark traces
are near-random on real-world outcomes (AUC 0.45–0.48; §4.2) and can even hurt downstream selection
on SWE-bench (§4.2). Second, not all outcome proxies are equally aligned : despite being sparser, training
on code survival yields consistently better discrimination than training on PR merge (§4.3). Third, rubric
supervision makes critic scores actionable across LLM backbones: success-only critics can overfit to a specific
LLM backbone, whereas rubric-supervised critics are robust enough to act as a shared scoring function for
selection and early stopping (§5.2).
Further, we demonstrate the utility of the critic in down-stream use cases. For inference-time scaling, we
use the critic to score each trajectory, increasing downstream improvements by up to 15.9 points on SWE-
bench, and enabling early stopping of unsuccessful agent trajectories (§5.1). The same critic also provides
training-time signal by selecting useful real-world segments for supervised fine-tuning (§5.3).
We will release the critic model1 together with rubric definitions, prompts, and code for constructing segments
from real-world interaction data2 , making it easier to learn and apply critics from interaction traces—supporting
  1 https://huggingface.co/OpenHands/openhands-critic-4b-v1.0
  2 https://github.com/OpenHands/critic-rubrics




                                                                    2
inference-time scaling, training-time improvement, and other downstream uses.


2     Data: Modeling Interactions as Segments
We represent both benchmark tasks and real-world user–agent conversations as sequences of segments, a
practical unit for credit assignment and supervision grounding. In benchmarks, each task typically forms
a single segment with verified outcome supervision (e.g., unit-test pass/fail). In real-world deployments,
however, supervision is indirect and often only available at coarser granularity (e.g., pull requests), requiring
explicit attribution to the segments that produced it. This section (i) reviews verified-reward supervision in
benchmarks (§2.1), (ii) defines segments and how multi-turn conversations in real-world deployments induce
segment sequences (§2.2), and (iii) describes how PR- and commit-based outcome proxies are grounded to
segments (§2.3).

2.1    Supervision in Verified-Reward Benchmarks
Benchmarks such as SWE-bench (Jimenez et al., 2024) and SWE-Gym (Pan et al., 2025) provide verified
outcome supervision: an agent attempt is labeled successful if it satisfies an external checker (e.g., unit tests
pass), and unsuccessful otherwise. These settings are typically single-human-turn episodes – the user provides
a single initial request and the agent works autonomously to completion without further human input – so
each task corresponds to one segment. We can write the benchmark episode as a single segment

                                 s1 = (u1 , a1,1 , o1,1 , . . . , a1,T1 ),            a1,T1 = finish,          (1)

with a verified outcome label y ∈ {0, 1} (e.g., tests fail/pass) that applies directly to this segment, making
credit assignment straightforward.

2.2    Representing Trajectories as Segments
Multi-turn trajectories. In real-world deployments, an agent interacts with a user and external tools over
a multi-turn trajectory: the user issues an initial request, the agent takes actions in an environment (e.g.,
editing files, running commands), and the user provides follow-ups that refine, redirect, or correct the objective.
Unlike verified-reward benchmarks, these trajectories generally do not come with a clean, per-episode reward
signal (e.g., pass/fail from an external checker). Instead, supervision is indirect, delayed, and often only
observed at coarse granularity (e.g., PR merge, reviewer approval), making it unclear which parts of the
trajectory were responsible.
Interactions. An agent interacts with an external environment through a sequence of actions and observations
interleaved with user messages. Actions include tool uses such as editing files or running shell commands;
observations include tool outputs and environment feedback. We write a full interaction trajectory as

                            τ = (u1 , a1 , o1 , a2 , o2 , . . . , aT , oT , u2 , aT +1 , oT +1 , . . .),       (2)

where each ui is a user message, each at is an agent action (including tool calls and finish), and each ot is the
resulting observation.
From trajectories to segments. We convert a multi-turn trajectory into a sequence of segments, where
each segment corresponds to one user-initiated unit of work that the agent executes to completion before
the next user turn arrives. Concretely, segment si begins with a user message ui and ends when the agent
indicates completion via a finish action:

                            si = (ui , ai,1 , oi,1 , ai,2 , oi,2 , . . . , ai,Ti ),       ai,Ti = finish,      (3)



                                                                    3
where ui initiates segment i, each ai,t is an agent action, and each oi,t is the resulting observation. A multi-turn
conversation thus induces an ordered segment sequence

                                                                  (s1 , s2 , . . . , sN ),                                                   (4)

with ui+1 arriving after si completes and initiating si+1 .
Implications for supervision and credit assignment. In verified-reward benchmarks, tasks are typically
single-turn episodes and thus correspond to a single segment with an outcome label that applies directly (§2.1).
In contrast, real-world multi-turn trajectories involve shifting objectives and corrective feedback: the follow-up
message ui+1 may implicitly evaluate or revise earlier work, and later segments can partially overwrite earlier
changes. Because outcome signals are coarse, delayed, and not uniquely attributable, credit assignment
across the induced segment sequence is substantially harder than in benchmark settings, motivating explicit
grounding of outcome proxies to the segments that produced them (§2.3).

2.3    Assigning Indirect Outcome Signals to Segments
Unlike benchmarks where unit tests provide a clear outcome, real-world deployment rarely provides reliable
segment-level success signals. The available proxies are noisy and often confounded:
• Pull request merge is not equivalent to conversation success. At the end of a conversation, one
  indication that the conversation is successful could be that the generated code is incorporated into the code
  base, e.g. through a pull request (PR) being merged. However, multiple conversations may contribute to a
  single PR, and users may revert agent changes or push their own fixes before merging.
• User ratings are subjective and noisy. Ratings may reflect surface impressions, accidental clicks, or
  delayed discovery of bugs.
• No natural trajectory boundary. Real-world conversations can extend indefinitely (e.g., via context
  condensation, Smith 2025), so it is unclear which portion of the interaction should receive credit.
These issues exemplify the two challenges highlighted in §1: metric quality (proxies are noisy or confounded)
and label scarcity (fine-grained success signals are only available for a small fraction of segments).

                                                                         PR #1234
                                                                      merged = True




                     Commit a3f2            Commit b7e1               Commit c9d4            Commit d2a8              Commit e5f3
                     50 lines edited        80 lines edited            50 lines edited       human commit             40 lines edited
                       46 retained           68 retained                 39 retained          (no tracking)             35 retained




                      Segment 1                            Segment 2                                                   Segment 1
                merged=True survival=92%          merged=True survival=82%                                       merged=True survival=88%

                   50 lines → 46 retained            130 lines → 107 retained                                       40 lines → 35 retained



                              Human-Agent Conversation 1                                                      Human-Agent Conversation 2



Figure 2 From sparse outcomes to dense feedback in real-world usage. A pull request (PR) provides a
coarse outcome signal (merged or not). Each PR contains commits, which we attribute to segments—self-contained
units of agent work within multi-turn conversations (§2.2). This hierarchy grounds supervision at multiple granularities:
PR-merge labels apply to all segments linked to the PR, while code survival assigns fine-grained credit based on how
much segment-authored code remains in the final diff. Critic Rubrics provide dense, outcome-agnostic supervision for
every segment.

Building a hierarchy: PR → commits → segments. To ground supervision in real-world settings, we


                                                                                4
organize coding agent data around pull requests (PRs) as the top-level unit, since they provide the most
accessible external signal of success. Each PR contains a sequence of commits (c1 , . . . , cK ), which can be
traced back to the segments that produced them. This induces a three-level hierarchy—PR → commits →
segments—that enables supervision at multiple granularities (Fig. 2).
Conversation-level outcome: PR merge. PR merge success is a binary indicator of whether the
associated PR was accepted and merged. This signal requires no additional annotation but is coarse and
noisy: all segments linked to the PR inherit the same label, even if later interactions overwrite earlier work.
Segment-level outcome: code survival. To address credit assignment, we define code survival, which
measures what fraction of a segment’s code contributions persist in the final merged diff:
                                                 P
                                                   c∈Ci lines in final(c)
                                  survival(si ) = P                       ,
                                                    c∈Ci lines total(c)

where Ci is the set of commits attributable to segment si . We compute lines total(c) and lines in final(c) over
added and modified lines in the commit diff. A segment whose code is fully reverted receives survival = 0,
while one whose contributions persist intact receives survival = 1. Segments without attributable commits
receive no survival label, which makes this signal significantly sparser than PR merge.
Segment extraction and commit attribution. Real-world conversations require explicit processing to
extract segments and attribute commits. We detect segment boundaries by identifying context resets (e.g.,
prompt condensation) or tool configuration changes, and mark segment completion by looking for the agent’s
finish tool call. For commit attribution, we extract commit SHAs from tool outputs and prioritize precision:
ambiguous cases remain unlabeled to avoid incorrect credit assignment. Implementation details are provided
in §B.


3    Critic Rubrics
The coding agent outcome proxies introduced in §2—PR merge and code survival—tell us whether an
interaction ultimately succeeded, but not why. They are also sparse at the segment level: as summarized in
Tab. 1, only 4% of real-world segments have code-survival labels and only 6% have PR-merge labels. Without
additional signal, most production segments provide no direct supervision for critic learning.

Table 1 Real-world user-agent interaction data composition. Most segments lack success labels, illustrating label
sparsity.

                                                                    With Labels
                               Conversations     Segments    Code Survival     PR Merge
                       Train            37,855     150,290             4,266         8,203
                       Test                386       1,547             1,083         1,547
                       Total           38,241     151,837       5,349 (4%)     9,750 (6%)


To turn unlabeled segments into reusable learning signal for critic training, we introduce a rubric-based
supervision framework. Concretely, we define Critic Rubrics, a taxonomy of 24 behavioral features that
capture common failure modes and user dissatisfaction at the segment level. Rubrics are segment-level (one
annotation per segment), trace-observable (derivable from the interaction trace without outcome leakage), and
scalably annotatable (via LLM-based annotation). In real-world usage, users often follow up after the agent
finishes with corrections, clarifications, or frustration—implicit feedback that rubrics systematically extract.
This section describes rubric design (§3.1), annotation methodology (§3.2), and validates that rubric features
correlate with outcome labels (§3.3).


                                                       5
3.1    Rubric Design
Rubric construction methodology. We developed the rubric taxonomy through an iterative human-
in-the-loop process. We randomly sampled real-world conversations and agent trajectories on SWE-Gym,
then prompted frontier LLMs (o3, Claude Opus 4) to identify behavioral patterns distinguishing successful
from unsuccessful interactions. Domain experts reviewed candidate features, merging overlapping categories,
splitting overly broad ones, and refining definitions for consistent annotation. We iterated until the taxonomy
stabilized, yielding 24 features that balance coverage with annotation reliability.
Rubric categories. We define 24 rubric features grouped into three categories (see Tab. 6 in the Appendix
for full definitions and prompt templates).
• Agent behavioral issues. 13 binary indicators covering common failure modes: misunderstanding user
  intent, ignoring instructions, insufficient code analysis, acting on ambiguous requirements, improper tool use,
  looping on failed actions, skipping tests, inadequate debugging, incomplete implementation, file management
  errors, scope creep, risky actions without permission, and other issues.
• User follow-up patterns. In addition to the overall sentiment of the user (positive/negative/neutral),
  these include 8 binary indicators capturing how users respond after the agent finishes: clarification requests,
  corrections, direction changes, VCS requests (commit/push), progress concerns, frustration, reversion
  requests, and other issues. These features are only defined when a user message exists after an agent finish
  action.
• Infrastructure issues. 2 indicators distinguishing external failures (platform limits, network issues) from
  failures caused by prior agent actions.

3.2    Annotation Methodology
We annotate each segment with an LLM-based rubric annotator. Each rubric feature is specified as a typed
schema (e.g., Binary, Classification) and compiled into an OpenAI-compatible tool definition. Given a
segment trace si = (ui , ai,1 , . . . , ai,Ti ) and, when available, the post-finish user message ui+1 , the annotator
labels rubric features as an external observer; the schema is context-adaptive, using the full rubric only
when follow-up exists and a reduced rubric otherwise. To prevent leakage, the annotator is never shown
PR outcomes, survival labels, or downstream artifacts, and sees only the agent trace and optional follow-up
message. We run annotation at scale via batch API calls with a frontier reasoning model (o3 with high
reasoning effort). Please refer to §G for full prompts and tool description.

3.3    Rubric Effect Analysis
Given sparse and noisy outcome proxies in real-world settings, we first validate whether rubric features
correlate with outcome labels across both real-world and benchmark settings. We treat these associations
as a construct-validity check: rubric features should behave like failure-mode indicators across independent
outcome proxies. This serves two purposes: (1) confirming that our rubric taxonomy captures meaningful
failure modes, and (2) identifying which features carry the strongest signal for downstream modeling.
Methodology. For each binary rubric feature, we estimate its effect on success by comparing success rates
when the feature is detected vs. not detected:

                              ∆ = P (success | detected) − P (success | ¬detected).

We test significance with Fisher’s exact test and control for multiple comparisons using Benjamini–Hochberg
FDR correction. We evaluate four conditions: real-world data with PR merge and code survival as outcome
labels (§2), plus SWE-bench and SWE-Gym, where success is unit-test pass/fail. Full statistical details,
including per-dataset effect sizes and p-values, are provided in §D.



                                                          6
                                               Real-World (PR Merge)                                                          Real-World (Code Survival)
      Insufficient clarification
    Misunderstood intention
              Other user issue
Incomplete implementation
 Removal/reversion request
           Insufficient testing
          Insufficient analysis
                 Loop behavior
       Insufficient debugging
         Infra issue (external)
   Did not follow instruction
  Infra issue (agent-caused)
                     Correction
     Improper tool use/setup
    Clarification/restatement
                   Scope creep
             Direction change
        Frustration/complaint
     File management errors
         VCS update requests
            Other agent issue
     Progress/scope concern
    Risky actions/permission
                                   0.3   0.2        0.1       0.0      0.1             0.2                  0.3             0.2      0.1        0.0        0.1   0.2
                                                    PR Merge Rate                                                                   Code Survival Rate
                                                    SWE-bench                                                                         SWE-Gym
      Insufficient clarification
    Misunderstood intention
Incomplete implementation
           Insufficient testing
          Insufficient analysis
                 Loop behavior
       Insufficient debugging
         Infra issue (external)
   Did not follow instruction
  Infra issue (agent-caused)
     Improper tool use/setup
                   Scope creep
     File management errors
            Other agent issue
    Risky actions/permission
                                   0.3   0.2        0.1       0.0      0.1             0.2                  0.3             0.2      0.1        0.0        0.1   0.2
                                                     Resolve Rate                                                                     Resolve Rate
                                                                             Significant (FDR q < 0.05)   Not significant

Figure 3 Rubric effects differ between benchmarks and real-world data. Each point shows the change in
success probability when a rubric feature is present (∆), with 95% confidence intervals; red indicates FDR significance
(q < 0.05, where q is the FDR-adjusted p-value). Bottom (benchmarks). SWE-bench and SWE-Gym show strong,
consistent negative effects for core agent-behavior failures—especially incomplete implementation, insufficient testing,
and insufficient debugging—indicating these behaviors reliably predict unit-test failure. Top (real-world). In
contrast, effect sizes are smaller and less consistently significant under PR-merge and code-survival proxies, reflecting
noisier supervision and multi-turn credit assignment; user follow-up features (e.g., correction or reversion requests)
exhibit stronger associations with code survival than with PR merge. Overall, benchmarks highlight stable failure
modes, while real-world data exposes proxy-dependent and interaction-dependent effects.


Results. Fig. 3 reveals a clear contrast between benchmarks and real-world data.
• Benchmarks (SWE-bench, SWE-Gym) exhibit strong and highly consistent effects: core agent-behavior
  failures such as incomplete implementation, insufficient testing, insufficient debugging, and insufficient
  analysis consistently reduce success by 15–21 percentage points (all p < 0.001 after FDR correction; see
  Tab. 7). This confirms that the rubrics capture stable, causal-looking failure modes under controlled unit-test
  supervision.
• Real-world data shows weaker and noisier effects under PR-merge and code-survival proxies, with fewer
  features reaching significance and wider confidence intervals. Nevertheless, the same behavioral issues
  generally remain negatively associated with success, and proxy-specific patterns emerge: user follow-up signals
  such as removal or reversion request show a strong negative effect (∆ = −0.13, q < 0.001; FDR-adjusted
  p-value), consistent with code survival providing finer-grained credit assignment.
Rubric annotations provide dense behavioral supervision, but LLM-based annotation using generic LLMs is
too slow and expensive to use as an evaluator at inference time or at scale during agent improvement (§A).
We therefore train a specialized critic models that predict rubric features and success scores directly from
the segment trace, turning real-world interactions into fast, reusable learning signals for both inference-time
and training-time improvements.




                                                                                      7
4     Critic Model Evaluation
We organize experiments around one central question: what training signals produce critics that generalize?
We test transfer from benchmark to real-world data (§4.2), compare outcome proxies derived from real-world
data (§4.3), and evaluate cross-agent robustness under different supervision schemes (§5.2).

4.1    Experimental Setup
Training objectives and losses. We compare two objectives: Success-Only (predict outcome proxy only)
versus Success+Rubrics (jointly predict outcome label and 24 rubric features in §3). We explore two outcome
proxies PR merge and code survival defined in §2.3. For code survival (a scalar between 0 and 1), we compare
three training variants: BCE-floor (positive label only when survival=1), BCE-round (positive label when
survival ≥ 0.5), and MSE regression on the continuous survival score.
Data splits. We create a held-out real-world test set by reserving ≈20% of outcome-linked segments, yielding
1547 segments with PR-merge labels and 1083 with code-survival labels (Tab. 1). We train on all remaining
real-world segments, including both outcome-labeled segments and unlabeled segments with rubric annotations
only. Outcome supervision is highly sparse in real-world data (4% survival-labeled; 6% merge-labeled),
whereas rubric labels are available for all segments, motivating joint training with rubrics as dense auxiliary
supervision. We additionally include 4,238 trajectories from SWE-Gym (Pan et al., 2025) for training and
evaluate on SWE-bench (Jimenez et al., 2024).
Agent scaffold, model, and input format. We use OpenHands Agent SDK (Wang et al., 2025a,b) as the
agent scaffold, which supports file editing, bash execution, web browsing, and MCP (MCP Team, 2025). We
initialize critics from Qwen3-4B-Instruct and add a multi-task prediction head. Each input is a segment trace
formatted with the model’s chat template, including tool definitions for richer context. Real-world traces
have segments with an average of 38K tokens, with the 90th percentile at 69K. We use a 64K context length
with left truncation to preserve recent context.
Evaluation data. We evaluate on 1,547 held-out real-world segments (Tab. 1) and on SWE-bench Verified
trajectories generated by two agents with different LLM backbones: Claude Sonnet 4.5 (500 instances ×
4 runs) and Claude Opus 4.5 (500 instances × 4 runs). For cross-backbone ranking (Tab. 3), we combine
them into a Combined set (500 instances × 8 runs). For inference-time scaling (Best@K and early stopping),
we evaluate on the mixed-outcome subset (instances where at least one run succeeds and at least one fails),
since only these instances admit improvements over random selection. We report results on the Combined set
unless otherwise noted.

4.2    Benchmark-Trained Critics Do Not Transfer to Real-world Data
Setup. We train critics using only trajectories sampled from SWE-gym (no real-world data) and evaluate on
both real-world data and SWE-bench. This isolates whether evaluators trained on benchmark-style dataset
transfer to real-world data and whether real-world data contributes to evaluator robustness.
Result. Benchmark-trained critics fail on real-world data (Tab. 2, “No Real-World Data” rows). On real-world
data, they perform at or below random: AUC 0.48 for PR merge and 0.45 for code survival, compared to
0.64–0.69 for critics trained with real-world data. This confirms that benchmark success (unit-test passage)
is misaligned with real-world outcomes such as code survival and PR acceptance. More surprisingly, critics
trained on benchmark-style datasets also underperform on SWE-bench downstream selection. While intrinsic
AUC appears reasonable (0.59), Best@8 is only 45.6%, compared to 57.9% for Random@8—12.3 points below
random.




                                                      8
Table 2 Comprehensive Model Comparison. Success + Rubrics models jointly predict behavioral features and success,
while Success-Only models predict success without rubric supervision. Best@K and Early Stopping metrics are on the
mixed-outcome subset (148 instances); Early Stopping uses fixed τ =0.5 with ∆ showing improvement over random.
SWE-bench uses combined Sonnet + Opus trajectories. All results use final checkpoint.

                                 Real-World Interactions                     SWE-bench (Mixed Subset)
                                                                     Intrinsic              Best@K (%)         Early Stop
 Model                           AUC    F1     Prec   Rec    AUC    F1     Prec   Rec    @2     @4     @8      ∆       Att
 PR Merge Objective
 No Real-World Data              0.48   0.85   0.75   1.00   0.59   0.81   0.69   0.99   49.2   44.2   45.6   +12.9   5.12
 Success-Only                    0.64   0.86   0.76   0.99   0.64   0.82   0.69   0.99   58.5   57.1   57.1   +13.7   4.13
 Success + Rubrics               0.58   0.86   0.75   1.00   0.64   0.81   0.69   0.99   66.8   72.4   72.1   +18.4   1.44
 Survival Objective
 No Real-World Data              0.45   0.70   0.54   1.00   0.59   0.81   0.69   0.99   49.2   44.2   45.6   +12.9   5.12
 Success-Only                    0.65   0.70   0.55   0.95   0.62   0.82   0.70   0.99   65.3   68.7   63.6   +19.1   1.76
 Success + Rubrics (MSE)         0.51   0.70   0.54   0.99   0.62   0.81   0.69   1.00   53.6   47.5   45.6   +12.8   4.80
 Success + Rubrics (BCE-round)   0.54   0.70   0.54   0.99   0.66   0.82   0.69   0.99   66.9   71.8   72.1   +18.4   1.48
 Success + Rubrics (BCE-floor)   0.69   0.71   0.60   0.87   0.62   0.82   0.70   0.98   66.7   72.6   73.8   +17.7   1.35
 Random                          0.50    –      –      –     0.50    –       –     –     57.8   57.8   57.9    0.0     8.0



4.3      Code Survival Provides More Fine-Grained Supervision
Setup. We compare critics trained on two real-world outcome proxies: PR merge (binary) versus code
survival (continuous fraction of agent-written code retained in the final merged diff). Both are derived from
the PR–commit–segment hierarchy described in §2.3. In Tab. 2, each critic is evaluated using the intrinsic
AUC corresponding to its own supervision target (merge for merge-trained; survival for survival-trained).
Result. Critics trained on code survival achieve higher AUC on real-world data (0.69 vs 0.58) despite
fewer labeled segments (§1). Survival is a more fine-grained, segment-attributable proxy: the continuous 0–1
score captures partial successes that a binary merge label collapses, and it is computed per-segment rather
than applied uniformly to all segments linked to a PR. We hypothesize that survival is also less confounded
by non-agent factors (e.g., reviewer availability, human follow-up edits) that can introduce label noise into
PR merge. As with all production outcomes, survival is noisy; we use it for learning signal rather than
as ground-truth correctness. Given these considerations, we use code survival as the primary proxy for
real-world outcome in subsequent analyses.


5     Effect on Down-stream Task Performance
Next, we examine, what can such critics enable in practice? We evaluate inference-time policies that use critic
scores for Best-of-K selection and compute-efficient early stopping (§5.1), and we test whether critic scores
can curate real-world data for supervised fine-tuning (§5.3).

5.1      Critics Enable Inference-Time Scaling
Setup. We study two inference-time policies that use critic scores to improve agent performance under a finite
sampling budget: (i) Best-of-K selection, which ranks K candidate trajectories and chooses the top-scored
one, and (ii) early stopping, which generates attempts sequentially and stops early once the critic score exceeds
a threshold. We evaluate on the mixed-outcome subset of SWE-bench Verified (instances where at least one
run succeeds and at least one fails), since only these instances admit improvements over random selection.
Best-of-K selection. With a fixed budget of K=8 candidates, rubric supervision yields a large end-task
gain (Tab. 2). Success+Rubrics (BCE-floor) reaches 73.8% Best@8, compared to 63.6% for Success-Only
(+10.2 points), and improves over Random@8 (57.9%) by +15.9 points. Cross-backbone results (Tab. 3)


                                                             9
Table 3 Cross-backbone generalization on mixed-outcome instances. ∆: Best@K improvement over random. Success-
Only overfits to Sonnet but degrades below random on Opus; rubric-supervised models generalize.

                                                Sonnet 4.5         Opus 4.5       Combined
             Model                              ∆@4     MRR       ∆@4    MRR      ∆@8     MRR
             No Real-World Data                +3.9        0.75   -8.8   0.69    -12.3     0.61
             Success-Only                      +7.0        0.77   -8.1   0.72    +5.7      0.78
             Success+Rubrics (BCE-floor)       +3.9        0.76   +2.6   0.74    +15.9     0.83
             Success+Rubrics (BCE-round)       +1.8        0.74   -1.2   0.72    +14.2     0.81
             Success+Rubrics (MSE)             +1.8        0.74   +0.4   0.73    -12.3     0.63


show this gain is robust: Success-Only overfits to Claude Sonnet 4.5 as the LLM backbone but degrades below
random on Claude Opus 4.5, whereas rubric-supervised critics maintain positive gains on both. Notably,
direct survival regression (MSE) performs below random (45.6%), highlighting that downstream selection
requires calibrated ranking rather than raw regression fit.
Early stopping. Early stopping uses critic scores as accept/stop decisions: we accept the first attempt
whose score exceeds a threshold τ , otherwise continuing until acceptance or a maximum of K=8 attempts.
For fair comparison in Tab. 2, we fix τ =0.5 across all models and average over 100 random permutations
of attempt order. At τ =0.5, Success+Rubrics (BCE-floor) achieves +17.7 points over random selection
while using only 1.35 attempts on average—an 83% compute reduction compared to exhaustive sampling.
Compared to Success-Only, rubric supervision achieves similar gains while requiring fewer attempts (1.35 vs.
1.76), indicating better-calibrated accept/stop scores.

5.2    Rubric Supervision Improves Cross-Backbone Robustness
Setup. We compare Success+Rubrics versus Success-Only critics under cross-backbone transfer: we evaluated
critics on trajectories from two agents using different LLM backbones (Claude Sonnet 4.5 vs Opus 4.5). All
experiments use the OpenHands scaffold; we vary the LLM backbone. This setting isolates whether critic
scores capture transferable, behavior-level signals rather than backbone-specific artifacts.
Result. Success-Only exhibits severe backbone-specific overfitting (Tab. 3): it improves over random on Sonnet
but can degrade below random on Opus, indicating that sparse outcome supervision alone encourages reliance
on spurious, backbone-dependent cues. In contrast, rubric-supervised critics maintain consistent positive
gains on both backbones, suggesting that rubric labels promote more backbone-invariant representations
of failure modes (e.g., incomplete edits, incorrect assumptions) that transfer across LLM backbones. This
cross-backbone robustness helps explain why rubric-supervised critics support reliable inference-time scaling
policies (§5.1) even when intrinsic AUC differences are modest.

5.3    Critic Scores Provide Training-Time Supervision via Data Selection
Setup. We test whether critic scores yield a useful training-time learning signal by curating real-world
segments for supervised fine-tuning (SFT). We construct three SFT datasets of equal size using: (i) Critic-
selected, which ranks segments by critic-predicted success and selects the top subset; (ii) Proxy-filtered,
which retains segments with available outcome proxies (here, survival=1); and (iii) Random, which samples
uniformly at random. We first filter the real-world dataset to segments with a survival label equal to 1,
yielding 3673 segments. We also construct critic-selected and random datasets of equal size from the full
real-world dataset for controlled comparison. Finally, using Qwen3-Coder-30B-A3B-Instruct as the base
model, we perform supervised fine-tuning on three datasets with identical compute and evaluate the resulting
agents on SWE-Bench.


                                                      10
Result. As shown in Tab. 4, the key finding is that data curation matters: random SFT provides no
improvement over the base model (46.2% vs. 46.6%), while critic-selected SFT improves solve rate to 47.8%.
This confirms that naively fine-tuning on real-world data can be ineffective, but critic predictions provide
actionable signals for identifying beneficial training examples. Selection using observed code-survival outcomes
reaches 50.4%, serving as an approximate upper bound for what is achievable when an outcome proxy is
available and highlighting headroom for improving critics.

Table 4 SFT data selection results on SWE-bench Verified. Critic-selected trajectories outperform random selection
for agent fine-tuning, demonstrating that critic predictions provide actionable training signal.

                   Selection Strategy                        Resolved    Rate     ∆ vs Base
                   Base Model (no SFT)                       233 / 500   46.6%             —
                   Critic-selected                           239 / 500   47.8%          +1.2
                   Proxy-filtered (code survival = 1)        252 / 500   50.4%          +3.8
                   Random                                    231 / 500   46.2%           -0.4



6    Related Work
Reward Models and Multi-Objective Supervision. Reward models for RLHF predict preferences from
pairwise comparisons (Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022), while process reward models (Lightman et al.,
2023; Uesato et al., 2022) decompose evaluation into step-level feedback. ArmoRM (Wang et al., 2024) further
decomposes rewards into interpretable objectives (honesty, safety, verbosity) via multi-objective learning. Our
rubric supervision serves a related but distinct purpose: rather than interpretability alone, rubrics enable
semi-supervised learning—behavioral features can be annotated on all trajectories regardless of outcome labels,
transforming unlabeled data from unusable to informative.

Critic Applications. Verifiers for best-of-K selection are well-established for mathematical reasoning
(Cobbe et al., 2021; Li et al., 2022) and recently for software agents (Pan et al., 2025). Snell et al. (2024)
show that inference-time compute can exceed training-time scaling. Our rubric-supervised critics enable
both inference-time selection (83% compute reduction via early stopping) and training-time data curation
(SFT improvements over random selection), while generalizing across LLM backbones within the same agent
scaffold.


7    Conclusion
Benchmarks for coding agents often rely on verifiable rewards such as unit tests, whereas real-world human–
agent interactions provide only indirect, noisy, and sparse supervision. We present a practical approach for
learning critics from interaction traces by (i) structuring data into segments and (ii) introducing a rubric-
based supervision framework (instantiated as Critic Rubrics), segment-level behavioral features that
provide dense process supervision. Together, these enable semi-supervised critic training that combines
rubric prediction with sparse outcome labels such as code survival. Empirically, we find that real-world
supervision is necessary, code survival provides more fine-grained and attributable supervision than PR merge,
and rubric supervision yields critic scores that generalize across LLM backbones and support inference-time
scaling and training-time data selection.




                                                        11
Impact Statement
This work develops learned evaluators (critics) for coding agents trained on real-world interaction data. We
anticipate several positive impacts: (1) more reliable evaluation of agent behavior in real-world settings, (2)
reduced computational waste through early stopping (83% compute reduction), and (3) improved training
data curation for agent improvement.
Potential risks include: critics may inadvertently encode biases present in real-world data or rubric definitions,
potentially reinforcing certain behavioral patterns while penalizing others; over-reliance on critic scores as the
sole quality metric could lead to reward hacking or miss failure modes not captured by the rubric taxonomy;
and critics trained on one deployment context may not transfer to different user populations or product
surfaces.
We mitigate these risks by: (1) making the rubric taxonomy and critic model publicly available for scrutiny
and improvement, (2) recommending human-in-the-loop validation rather than fully autonomous deployment,
and (3) encouraging monitoring of critic score distributions for drift detection. We believe the benefits of
more reliable agent evaluation outweigh these risks when critics are used as one signal among many, not as
the sole arbiter of quality.




                                                       12
References
Anthropic. Claude code: An agentic coding tool. https://www.anthropic.com/claude-code, 2025. Accessed: 2025-01-
  15.
Anysphere. Cursor: The ai code editor. https://cursor.com, 2024. Accessed: 2026-01-01.
Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain, Stanislav Fort,
  Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, et al. Training a helpful and harmless assistant with reinforcement learning from
  human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05862, 2022.
Valerie Chen, Rohit Malhotra, Xingyao Wang, Juan Michelini, Xuhui Zhou, Aditya Bharat Soni, Hoang H. Tran,
  Calvin Smith, Ameet Talwalkar, and Graham Neubig. How can we assess human-agent interactions? case studies in
  software agent design, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.09801.
Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser, Matthias Plappert,
  Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, Christopher Hesse, and John Schulman. Training verifiers to solve
  math word problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168, 2021.
Carlos E. Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and Karthik R. Narasimhan.
  Swe-bench: Can language models resolve real-world github issues? In The Twelfth International Conference on
  Learning Representations, ICLR 2024, Vienna, Austria, May 7-11, 2024. OpenReview.net, 2024. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=VTF8yNQM66.
Yujia Li, David Choi, Junyoung Chung, Nate Kushman, Julian Schrittwieser, Rémi Leblond, Tom Eccles, James
  Keeling, Felix Gimeno, Agustin Dal Lago, Thomas Hubert, Peter Choy, Cyprien de Masson d’Autume, Igor
  Babuschkin, Xinyun Chen, Po-Sen Huang, Johannes Welbl, Sven Gowal, Alexey Cherepanov, James Molloy, Daniel J.
  Mankowitz, Esme Sutherland Robson, Pushmeet Kohli, Nando de Freitas, Koray Kavukcuoglu, and Oriol Vinyals.
  Competition-level code generation with alphacode. Science, 378(6624):1092–1097, December 2022. ISSN 1095-9203.
  doi: 10.1126/science.abq1158. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.abq1158.
Hunter Lightman, Vineet Kosaraju, Yura Burda, Harri Edwards, Bowen Baker, Teddy Lee, Jan Leike, John Schulman,
  Ilya Sutskever, and Karl Cobbe. Let’s verify step by step. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.20050, 2023.
MCP Team. Model context protocol (mcp)? https://modelcontextprotocol.io, 2025. Accessed: 2025-10-02.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini
  Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 35:27730–27744, 2022.
Jiayi Pan, Xingyao Wang, Graham Neubig, Navdeep Jaitly, Heng Ji, Alane Suhr, and Yizhe Zhang. Training software
   engineering agents and verifiers with swe-gym. In Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on Machine
   Learning (ICML 2025), 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.21139. arXiv:2412.21139, accepted at ICML 2025.
Calvin Smith. Openhands context condensensation for more efficient ai agents. All Hands AI Blog, April 2025. URL
  https://www.all-hands.dev/blog/openhands-context-condensensation-for-more-efficient-ai-agents.
Charlie Snell, Jaehoon Lee, Kelvin Xu, and Aviral Kumar. Scaling llm test-time compute optimally can be more
  effective than scaling model parameters. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.03314, 2024.
Luong Trung, Xinbo Zhang, Zhanming Jie, Peng Sun, Xiaoran Jin, and Hang Li. ReFT: Reasoning with reinforced
  fine-tuning. In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek Srikumar, editors, Proceedings of the 62nd Annual
  Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 7601–7614, Bangkok,
  Thailand, August 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.acl-long.410. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2024.acl-long.410/.
Jonathan Uesato, Nate Kushman, Ramana Kumar, Francis Song, Noah Siegel, Lisa Wang, Antonia Creswell, Geoffrey
  Irving, and Irina Higgins. Solving math word problems with process-and outcome-based feedback. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2211.14275, 2022.
Haoxiang Wang, Wei Xiong, Tengyang Xie, Han Zhao, and Tong Zhang. Interpretable preferences via multi-objective


                                                       13
  reward modeling and mixture-of-experts. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP
  2024, pages 10582–10592, 2024.
Xingyao Wang, Boxuan Li, Yufan Song, Frank F. Xu, Xiangru Tang, Mingchen Zhuge, Jiayi Pan, Yueqi Song, Bowen Li,
  Jaskirat Singh, Hoang H. Tran, Fuqiang Li, Ren Ma, Mingzhang Zheng, Bill Qian, Yanjun Shao, Niklas Muennighoff,
  Yizhe Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Junyang Lin, Robert Brennan, Hao Peng, Heng Ji, and Graham Neubig. Openhands:
  An open platform for AI software developers as generalist agents. In The Thirteenth International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2025a. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=OJd3ayDDoF.
Xingyao Wang, Simon Rosenberg, Juan Michelini, Calvin Smith, Hoang Tran, Engel Nyst, Rohit Malhotra, Xuhui
  Zhou, Valerie Chen, Robert Brennan, and Graham Neubig. The openhands software agent sdk: A composable and
  extensible foundation for production agents, 2025b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.03690.
Daniel J Wilson. The harmonic mean p-value for combining dependent tests. Proceedings of the National Academy of
  Sciences, 116(4):1195–1200, 2019.

Appendix

A     Critic Model vs. Reasoning LM latency comparison
Tab. 5 compares inference latency between the LLM rubric annotator and our trained critic. Reasoning
models like o3 take 17 seconds per segment on average to produce full rubric annotations, while our 4B critic
produces the same rubric outputs in approximately 1 second—a 16× speedup. This efficiency makes critic
scoring practical for Best@K selection, early stopping, and large-scale data curation.

                              Method                         Latency (s)    Speedup
                              LLM rubric annotator (o3)       17.0 ± 6.3      1.0×
                              Trained critic (Qwen3-4B)       1.1 ± 0.8       16×

Table 5 Inference latency for rubric prediction. Measured on 10 real-world segments using the full rubric schema (24
features). LLM uses o3 via LiteLLM; critic uses self-hosted vLLM.



B     Data Processing Details
This appendix provides implementation details for segment extraction and commit attribution described in §2.

B.1     Extracting Segments from Production Conversations
Multi-human-turn real-world trajectories require explicit segmentation to recover the segment boundaries
described above. Raw real-world data consists of timestamped LLM completion records, each containing
the input context and the agent’s output. We extract segments by sorting completions chronologically and
detecting boundaries when the retained message prefix diverges (e.g., due to prompt condensation) or when
the tool configuration changes (e.g., an agent version upgrade), both of which indicate a new interaction
episode.
Within each segment, we identify completion using OpenHands-specific termination patterns: a segment ends
when the agent invokes an explicit finish tool call. In rare cases where tool traces are missing but the agent
produces a final natural-language response without further tool calls, we also treat this as termination.




                                                        14
B.2    Linking Commits to Segments
Code survival requires attributing commits to the segments that created them. We prioritize precision in this
linkage: if evidence is ambiguous, the segment remains unlabeled for survival, contributing to label scarcity
but avoiding incorrect credit assignment.

Evidence-based commit attribution. We extract commit SHAs from tool outputs using patterns that
indicate commit creation rather than mere mention: (1) creation messages of the form [branch SHA] message
followed by file change statistics produced by git, (2) merge operations of the form Updating SHA1..SHA2
Fast-forward, and (3) commits containing Co-authored-by: OpenHands. Extracted SHAs are matched
against the corresponding PR’s commit list via full 40-character matching or short (7+ character) prefix
matching.

Computing survival. For each attributable commit, we parse its diff into a set of line-level changes keyed
by (file path, change type, normalized text) and intersect with the PR’s final merged diff. The survival score
for a segment is the ratio of surviving lines to total lines aggregated across commits. This approach handles
partial reverts naturally: if only part of a commit survives, the segment receives proportional credit.


C     Full Rubric Taxonomy
Tab. 6 provides the complete taxonomy of Critic Rubrics features derived from real-world traces.


D     Rubric Regression Methodology Details
Statistical Methodology. For each binary rubric feature, we compute a 2×2 contingency table (feature
detected/not × success/fail) and test association using Fisher’s exact test. We apply Benjamini-Hochberg
FDR correction within each dataset, then combine evidence across datasets using harmonic mean p-values—a
robust meta-analysis approach that controls false positives even under dependence (Wilson, 2019). Effect
sizes (∆) represent the difference in success probability: ∆ = P (success | detected) − P (success | ¬detected),
with 95% Wald confidence intervals.

Success Metrics. For real-world data, we analyze two complementary metrics: (1) PR merge—binary
indicator of whether the associated pull request was merged, and (2) code survival—continuous measure
(binarized at 0.5) of what fraction of the segment’s code contributions persist in the final merged diff. For
benchmark data (SWE-bench, SWE-Gym), both metrics reduce to unit test pass/fail since there is no actual
PR or code revision process.

Sample Sizes. The analysis includes 372,609 feature observations for PR merge (across 16,198 unique
segments with labels) and 254,086 observations for code survival (across 11,050 segments). Production data
contributes the majority of segments but has sparser labels; benchmark data has complete labels but fewer
segments.

Full Results. Tab. 7 provides the complete per-dataset regression results including effect sizes, sample
counts, and FDR-corrected q-values for each rubric feature.


E     Rubric Prediction Quality
The critic model learns to predict rubric features as an auxiliary task alongside success prediction. Tab. 8
shows how consistently the trained critic can replicate the LLM annotator’s labels on held-out segments. The


                                                      15
 Feature                             Type            Description
 Agent Behavioral Issues
 misunderstood intention             Binary          Agent misunderstood the user’s goal.
 did not follow instruction          Binary          Agent ignored explicit instructions.
 insufficient analysis               Binary          Agent failed to inspect relevant prior code/docs.
 insufficient clarification          Binary          Agent acted despite ambiguous requirements.
 improper tool use or setup          Binary          Misused tools or had incorrect dependencies/config.
 loop behavior                       Binary          Repeated the same failed action ≥ 3 times.
 insufficient testing                Binary          Skipped reasonable validation or test runs.
 insufficient debugging              Binary          Ignored or failed to debug observed failures.
 incomplete implementation           Binary          Delivered incomplete or nonfunctional code.
 file management errors              Binary          Created or modified files incorrectly.
 scope creep                         Binary          Added unrequested functionality.
 risky actions or permission         Binary          Performed risky actions without explicit approval.
 other agent issue                   Binary          Other agent-side failure not covered above.
 User Follow-Up Patterns (requires user reply)
 overall sentiment              Classification User sentiment: Positive / Negative / Neutral.
 clarification or restatement   Binary         User clarifies or restates earlier intent.
 correction                     Binary         User corrects technical or procedural error.
 direction change               Binary         User adds constraints or redirects scope.
 vcs update requests            Binary         User requests forward VCS actions (commit, push, merge).
 progress or scope concern      Binary         User flags slowness or excessive scope.
 frustration or complaint       Binary         User expresses dissatisfaction or annoyance.
 removal or reversion request   Binary         User requests to undo or revert prior work.
 other user issue               Binary         Any other user-side concern.
 Infrastructure Issues
 infrastructure external issue       Binary          External environment or platform failure.
 infrastructure agent caused issue   Binary          Infrastructure fault caused by prior agent actions.

Table 6 Comprehensive taxonomy of Critic Rubrics features derived from real-world traces. The “User Follow-Up
Patterns” section applies only when a user replies after the agent finishes.


model achieves high accuracy on most features, with mean AUC of 0.78 across all features. Notably, the five
features identified as most predictive of success in §3.3 (marked with †) achieve even higher mean AUC of
0.81, indicating that the critic learns to recognize exactly the behavioral patterns that correlate with failure.


F     Training Dynamics
We evaluate BCE-floor checkpoints at steps 2000, 4000, 6000, 8000, and 9658 (final) to understand training
stability.
Tab. 9 shows performance peaks at steps 4000–6000 with mild degradation thereafter (+0.6 Best@8 and +0.4
MRR at intermediate checkpoints vs. final). We report final checkpoint results throughout for methodological
consistency.


G     Critic Rubrics Prompts
G.1    Critic Prompts for Segment WITH user feedback
System Prompt



                                                       16
Table 7 Full regression results for rubric feature effects on success. For each dataset, we report: n (count when
detected), ∆ (effect on success rate), and q (Fisher’s exact test, FDR-corrected). Meta-p is the harmonic mean across
datasets. Bold indicates q < 0.05.

                                    Real-world Interaction            SWE-b                SWE-g
       Feature                        n       ∆          q        n    ∆         q     n     ∆          q   Meta-p
       Incomplete implementation    1681   +0.01     0.43 236 -0.21        <0.001    1007 -0.21   <0.001    <0.001
       Insufficient testing         3092     -0.01   0.56 425 -0.21        <0.001    1319 -0.14   <0.001    <0.001
       Insufficient debugging       1383   +0.02     0.30 289 -0.18        <0.001    1069 -0.15   <0.001    <0.001
       Insufficient analysis        1203    -0.04   0.01 278 -0.15         <0.001     749 -0.15   <0.001    <0.001
       Misunderstood intention       930    -0.05  0.003 123 -0.25         <0.001     282 -0.16   <0.001    <0.001
       Loop behavior                 487   +0.06   0.005   47 -0.20          0.02     198 -0.19   <0.001    <0.001
       Removal/reversion request     193    -0.13 <0.001    –     –              –      –     –         –   <0.001
       Did not follow instruction   3112     -0.01   0.40 939 -0.04           0.08   1820 -0.06   <0.001    <0.001
       File management errors        692   +0.06 <0.001 703 -0.02             0.42   1221 -0.03      0.20   <0.001
       Risky actions/permission      966   +0.05 <0.001    16 +0.19           0.26     37 -0.00      1.00   <0.001
       Scope creep                  1227   +0.04   0.002 589 -0.02            0.43   1192 -0.05    0.003    <0.001
       VCS update requests          2359   +0.03   0.009    –     –              –      –     –         –    0.003
       Progress/scope concern        422   +0.04     0.07   –     –              –      –     –         –     0.03
       Correction                   1088     -0.03   0.08   –     –              –      –     –         –     0.04
       Infra issue (agent-caused)    148   +0.08     0.06   2 -0.19           0.57     14 +0.02      1.00      0.07
       Infra issue (external)        304     -0.01   0.77  17 -0.22           0.12    139 -0.04      0.57      0.15
       Other agent issue              46   +0.12     0.12   8 +0.06           1.00     12 -0.07      1.00      0.16
       Improper tool use/setup      1129   +0.01     0.56 173 -0.07           0.12    442 -0.00      1.00      0.17
       Clarification/restatement    1100     -0.02   0.36   –     –              –      –     –         –      0.22
       Direction change             3037     -0.01   0.47   –     –              –      –     –         –      0.36
       Other user issue                6     -0.14   0.46   –     –              –      –     –         –      0.37
       Insufficient clarification   1000     -0.01   0.68   1 -0.69           0.42     13 -0.02      1.00      0.51
       Frustration/complaint         842   +0.01     0.77   –     –              –      –     –         –      0.73



You are an AI conversation annotator analyzing agent-user interactions to identify failure patterns.
,→  You are NOT participating in the conversation; you are an external observer evaluating what went
,→  wrong.

========================
CONVERSATION STRUCTURE
========================
- Focus on the LAST AGENT MESSAGE and the LAST USER MESSAGE (if any).
- Determine WHEN the user's follow-up occurred:
  - 'mid˙conversation': The agent had not clearly finished or handed off.
  - 'post˙completion': The agent signaled completion or handoff (e.g., final answer, 'done', 'all set').
  - 'no˙follow˙up': No user reply after the last agent message.

In your timing rationale, note what the agent was doing when the user intervened (quote brief evidence,
 ,→  e.g., 'Agent: 'I'll start running tests...' -¿ user replied next.', or 'Agent: 'Here's the final script.' ').

========================
CONTEXT SOURCES
========================
Use all evidence: screenshots, code, logs, specs, file trees, error messages, prompts/system messages,
,→  and tool traces. Prefer short verbatim quotes (¡=25 words) when supporting a claim.

========================
DETECTION FRAMEWORK
========================


                                                             17
Table 8 Rubric prediction on 1,547 real-world test segments. This measures learnability/consistency (how well the
critic reproduces the annotation protocol), not human-verified correctness. The critic achieves mean AUC of 0.78
across all features, and 0.81 on the top predictive features (marked with †) identified in §3.3. Prev. = prevalence; n =
positive examples.

                            Rubric Feature                         AUC       Prev.         n
                            Loop Behavior                            0.94     3.0%        105
                            Infra Issue Agent Caused                 0.91     0.5%         16
                            Insufficient Clarification Seeking       0.89     4.1%        146
                            Insufficient Debugging†                  0.88    13.3%        470
                            Incomplete Implementation†               0.82    13.6%        482
                            Risky Actions Or Permission Issues       0.82     4.4%        157
                            Insufficient Testing†                    0.81    24.2%        859
                            Infra Issue External                     0.81     1.6%         55
                            Insufficient Analysis†                   0.79    13.8%        489
                            Misunderstood Intention†                 0.76     7.6%        270
                            File Management Errors                   0.75    23.1%        819
                            Scope Creep                              0.70    21.9%        775
                            Did Not Follow Instruction               0.70    40.1%      1,423
                            Improper Tool Use Or Setup               0.66     9.3%        330
                            Other Agent Issue                        0.47     0.4%         13
                            Mean (all)                               0.78           –      –
                            Mean (top† )                             0.81           –      –

Table 9 Ablation: Training steps. Performance peaks at step 4000–6000, with mild degradation at longer training.
We report final checkpoint for consistency.

                           Model                     Best@2     Best@4      Best@8      MRR
                             Success + Rubrics (Survival)
                              step 2000                75.8      77.7        78.0       0.940
                              step 4000                75.8      77.8        78.3       0.945
                              step 6000                75.8      77.7        78.4       0.944
                              step 8000                75.9      78.0        78.1       0.943
                              step 9658 (final)        75.7      77.6        77.8       0.941
                           Success-Only (Survival)     75.5       76.4       74.8       0.925
                           Random                      73.1       73.1       73.2         –



Multiple issues can co-occur. For each issue:
1) Set the corresponding boolean to TRUE.
2) Provide a short, specific rationale quoting concrete evidence (user quotes, agent actions, errors).

USER FOLLOW-UP PATTERNS
- clarification˙or˙restatement: User clarifies/restates or corrects interpretation.
  - Examples: 'That's not what I meant...', 'I meant X, not Y.', 'Let me clarify...'

- correction: Agent basically understood the intention, but executed it incorrectly (fix
 ,→   technique/parameters/details).
  - Examples: 'Use DESC not ASC.', 'Right table, wrong WHERE clause.', 'Same approach, but wrong
   ,→   sort key.'

- direction˙change: User adds new constraints/intent or seeks information / asks questions that redirect
 ,→   the plan or scope.



                                                          18
 - Examples: 'Also handle time zones.', 'We need streaming, not batch.', 'Before coding, list the open
  ,→  PRs,' 'Which repo should we use?'
 - **Note:** VCS update instructions (commit/push/PR) are **not** direction˙change; tag as
  ,→  vcs˙update˙requests.

- vcs˙update˙requests: User instructs forward-moving VCS tasks.
  - Examples: 'git commit', 'create a branch', 'push to origin', 'open/merge a PR', 'tag the release'.
  - **Exclusive:** This does **not** count as direction˙change; choose one by default.
  - Reverts/resets/removals belong to removal˙or˙reversion˙request.

- progress˙or˙scope˙concern: User flags slowness, overcomplexity, or scope bloat.

- frustration˙or˙complaint: User shows dissatisfaction or irritation.

- removal˙or˙reversion˙request: User asks to remove code/files or revert changes.
  - Examples: 'Delete the new script.', 'Undo that migration.', 'git revert', 'Remove these outputs.'

- other˙user˙issue: Any other notable user concern not covered above.

MUTUAL-EXCLUSIVITY RULE (Core Follow-up Set)
- By default, choose only one among: clarification˙or˙restatement, correction, direction˙change,
 ,→   vcs˙update˙requests.
- Co-tag only when the user message clearly contains distinct parts that independently satisfy multiple
 ,→   categories.
- Tie-break order and guidance:
  1) direction˙change - user adds/changes goals/constraints OR asks for information that redirects the
   ,→  plan/approach. **Do not include VCS update instructions** (commit/push/PR); those are
   ,→  vcs˙update˙requests.
  2) vcs˙update˙requests - user instructs forward-moving VCS tasks. This **does not count as
   ,→  direction˙change**.
  3) clarification˙or˙restatement - user clarifies intent/meaning without changing goals/constraints.
  4) correction - goal stands; user fixes execution details (params/technique/scope).

AGENT BEHAVIORAL ISSUES
- misunderstood˙intention: Agent misunderstood the user's goal/intent.
  - Examples: User asked for a summary and agent produced a rewrite; user wanted high-level bullets
   ,→  but agent delivered full code.

- did˙not˙follow˙instruction: Agent ignored or failed to comply with explicit instructions/system
 ,→   constraints.
  - Examples: User: 'Do NOT push to main.' Agent pushes to main; System says not to create pull
   ,→  request unless user asks for it and user didn't ask for it, agent creates pull request; user asked for
   ,→  bullet points only, agent gives long prose.

- insufficient˙analysis: Didn't explore existing materials sufficiently (prior code/docs/examples) before
 ,→   acting.
  - Examples: User points to an existing function/file that is relavant OR already solves it; agent
   ,→  reinvents it.




                                                     19
- insufficient˙clarification: Failed to ask necessary questions before acting when requirements were
 ,→   ambiguous.
  - Examples: Agent proceeds despite unclear acceptance criteria (e.g., locales, time zones, error
   ,→  thresholds) then is corrected later.

- improper˙tool˙use˙or˙setup: Misused tools/commands or had missing/incorrect dependencies/setup.
  - Examples: wrong command syntax, using inappropriate tools for the task

- loop˙behavior: Repeats the same failed action 3+ times without strategy change.
  - Examples: repeat the same failed action 3+ times without changing approach).

- insufficient˙testing: Skipped reasonable verification/tests for non-trivial or risky changes (note: trivial
 ,→   edits may be acceptable).
  - Examples: No run/validation for a new parser; no check that a migration applies cleanly; no sanity
   ,→  check of output.

- insufficient˙debugging: Did not investigate or reduce failing behavior when needed to make progress.
  - Examples: Ignores stack trace; no isolation of failure; proceeds while errors persist.

- incomplete˙implementation: Delivered unfinished or non-functioning work.
  - Examples: TODO/FIXME left; stub methods; code that cannot run.

- file˙management˙errors: Wrong paths, overwrites, misplaced/extra files (including unnecessary files).
  - Examples: Writes into wrong directory; overwrites config; creates unwanted artifacts.

- scope˙creep: Implemented unrequested features without approval.
  - Examples: Adds a dashboard or endpoint not asked for.

- risky˙actions˙or˙permission: Risky steps without user's explicit consent.
  - Examples: git push to main; deleting existing files in a repo (deleting files created by agent itself is
   ,→  fine); altering credentials.

- other˙agent˙issue: Any agent-side problem not covered above.

INFRASTRUCTURE (EXTERNAL vs AGENT-CAUSED)
- infrastructure˙external˙issue: Environment/platform limits outside agent control.
  - Examples: Provider outage; disk full on managed runner; missing enterprise API key; network
   ,→  failure not caused by agent.

- infrastructure˙agent˙caused˙issue: Infrastructure fault introduced by the agent's prior actions.
  - Examples: Agent leaves a server running on port 8000; later start on 8000 fails; agent fills the disk
   ,→  with logs earlier, causing later writes to fail.

========================
QUALITY STANDARDS
========================
- Evidence Threshold: Mark TRUE only with specific evidence; prefer short quotes.
- Timing Awareness: If the user intervened mid-stream, consider whether the agent should have
 ,→  clarified earlier (flag insufficient˙clarification if so).
- Conservative Defaults: When uncertain, mark FALSE and briefly explain why.


                                                     20
- No speculation: Tie every flagged issue to observable behavior or quoted text.
“end–verbatim˝

“textbf–First User Message˝
“begin–verbatim˝
=== BEGIN OF CONVERSATION TO ANALYZE ===
[agent trajectory]
=== END OF CONVERSATION TO ANALYZE ===

Fill the annotate˙conversation˙with˙followup function.

Goal
- Identify when the user followed up (mid˙conversation, post˙completion, or no˙follow˙up) and what
 ,→  issues occurred.
- Set only the booleans that clearly apply. For the **exclusive set** (direction˙change,
 ,→  clarification˙or˙restatement, correction, vcs˙update˙requests), choose one by default using the
 ,→  tie-break rules; only co-tag if the message clearly contains independent parts for multiple
 ,→  categories.

What to record
1) Follow-up timing
  - Choose the timing value and, in follow˙up˙timing˙rationale, state what the agent was doing when
   ,→   the user replied and include a short quote.

2) User follow-up patterns (select all that apply)
  - clarification˙or˙restatement, correction, direction˙change, vcs˙update˙requests,
   ,→   progress˙or˙scope˙concern,
    frustration˙or˙complaint, removal˙or˙reversion˙request, other˙user˙issue.
  - Rationale: quote the user and explain in one sentence.

3) Agent behavioral issues (select all that apply)
  - misunderstood˙intention, did˙not˙follow˙instruction, insufficient˙analysis, insufficient˙clarification,
    improper˙tool˙use˙or˙setup, loop˙behavior, insufficient˙testing, insufficient˙debugging,
    incomplete˙implementation, file˙management˙errors, scope˙creep, risky˙actions˙or˙permission,
    other˙agent˙issue.
  - Rationale: cite code/commands/errors or a short quote and explain in one sentence.

4) Infrastructure
  - infrastructure˙external˙issue˙detected for environment/platform limits beyond agent control.
  - infrastructure˙agent˙caused˙issue˙detected for faults introduced by the agent's prior actions (e.g.,
   ,→   orphaned server on port 8000).
  - Rationale: include the error/status line or brief description.

Evidence & quality
- Prefer concrete, minimal quotes; avoid speculation. If evidence is insufficient, leave the flag false.
- If the user intervened mid-stream and the request was ambiguous, consider insufficient˙clarification.

Quick disambiguation (common splits)
- correction vs misunderstood˙intention: right goal, wrong details vs wrong goal altogether.




                                                     21
- did˙not˙follow˙instruction vs direction˙change: ignored a clear instruction vs user adds new
 ,→   requirement later.
- insufficient˙analysis vs insufficient˙clarification: didn't look for existing work vs didn't ask when
 ,→   requirements were ambiguous.
- insufficient˙testing vs insufficient˙debugging: skipped reasonable verification vs didn't investigate a
 ,→   failing state enough to make progress.
- direction˙change includes information seeking / question asking that redirects scope/approach.
- vcs˙update˙requests is not direction˙change; it covers forward-moving VCS steps (commit, branch,
 ,→   push, open/merge PR, tag).
- Requests to revert/reset/remove belong to removal˙or˙reversion˙request.
- For the **exclusive set** (direction˙change, clarification˙or˙restatement, correction,
 ,→  vcs˙update˙requests), choose one by default using the tie-break rules; only co-tag if the message
 ,→   clearly contains independent parts for multiple categories.
“end–verbatim˝

“textbf–Tool definition˝
“begin–verbatim˝
FollowUpTimingPrediction = ClassificationPrediction[
   Literal[
      ”mid˙conversation”,
      ”post˙completion”,
      ”no˙follow˙up”,
   ]
]

FEATURES = [
  # Specific fields for user follow-up patterns
  Feature(
     name=”follow˙up˙timing”,
     description=(
        ”WHEN did the user follow up? Choose exactly one: ”
        ”mid˙conversation: agent hadn't clearly finished; ”
        ”post˙completion: agent signaled completion/hand-off; ”
        ”no˙follow˙up: no user message after the last agent message.”
     ),
     prediction˙type=FollowUpTimingPrediction
  ),

   Feature(
      name=”clarification˙or˙restatement”,
      description=”User clarifies/restates or corrects interpretation. Examples: 'That's not what I
       ,→    meant...', 'I meant X, not Y.', 'Let me clarify...'”,
      prediction˙type=BinaryPrediction
   ),
   Feature(
      name=”correction”,
      description=(
          ”Agent broadly understood the intention but executed it incorrectly
           ,→  (technique/parameters/details). ”




                                                    22
          ”Examples: 'Use DESC not ASC.', 'Right table, wrong WHERE clause.', 'Same approach,
           ,→ wrong sort key.'”
       ),
       prediction˙type=BinaryPrediction
    ),
    Feature(
       name=”direction˙change”,
       description=(
          ”User adds new constraints/intent not previously specified; scope/goal evolves. Examples: 'Also
           ,→    handle time zones.', 'We actually need streaming, not batch.', 'Support Windows too.'”
       ),
       prediction˙type=BinaryPrediction
    ),
    Feature(
       name=”vcs˙update˙requests”,
       description=”User instructs forward-moving VCS updates: commit, create branch, push,
        ,→   open/merge PR, tag. (Revert/reset/remove , use removal˙or˙reversion˙request.)”,
       prediction˙type=BinaryPrediction
    ),
    Feature(
       name=”progress˙or˙scope˙concern”,
       description=”User flags slowness, overcomplexity, or scope bloat. Examples: 'This is taking too
        ,→   long.', 'Try a simpler approach.', 'This goes beyond what I asked.'”,
       prediction˙type=BinaryPrediction
    ),
    Feature(
       name=”frustration˙or˙complaint”,
       description=(”User expresses dissatisfaction or irritation. Examples: 'This is wrong.', 'You're not
        ,→   listening.', excessive caps or punctuation ('!!!', '???').”),
       prediction˙type=BinaryPrediction
    ),
    Feature(
       name=”removal˙or˙reversion˙request”,
       description=(”User asks to remove or revert code/files/changes. Examples: 'Delete the new
        ,→   script.', 'Undo that migration.', 'Remove these outputs.', 'git revert'.”),
       prediction˙type=BinaryPrediction
    ),
    Feature(
       name=”other˙user˙issue”,
       description=”Any other notable user concern not covered above.”,
       prediction˙type=BinaryPrediction
    )
]

G.2     Critic Prompts for Segment WITHOUT user feedback
System Prompt
You are an AI conversation annotator analyzing agent-environment interactions to identify failure
,→  patterns. You are NOT participating in the conversation; you are an external observer evaluating
,→  what went wrong.


                                                    23
========================
CONVERSATION STRUCTURE
========================
- Focus on the LAST AGENT MESSAGE.

========================
CONTEXT SOURCES
========================
Use all evidence: screenshots, code, logs, specs, file trees, error messages, prompts/system messages,
,→  and tool traces. Prefer short verbatim quotes (¡=25 words) when supporting a claim.

========================
DETECTION FRAMEWORK
========================
Multiple issues can co-occur. For each issue:
1) Set the corresponding boolean to TRUE.
2) Provide a short, specific rationale quoting concrete evidence (agent actions, errors).

AGENT BEHAVIORAL ISSUES
- misunderstood˙intention: Agent misunderstood the user's goal/intent.
  - Examples: User asked for a summary and agent produced a rewrite; user wanted high-level bullets
   ,→  but agent delivered full code.

- did˙not˙follow˙instruction: Agent ignored or failed to comply with explicit instructions/system
 ,→   constraints.
  - Examples: User: 'Do NOT push to main.' Agent pushes to main; System says not to create pull
   ,→  request unless user asks for it and user didn't ask for it, agent creates pull request; user asked for
   ,→  bullet points only, agent gives long prose.

- insufficient˙analysis: Didn't explore existing materials sufficiently (prior code/docs/examples) before
 ,→   acting.
  - Examples: User points to an existing function/file that is relavant OR already solves it; agent
   ,→  reinvents it.

- insufficient˙clarification: Failed to ask necessary questions before acting when requirements were
 ,→   ambiguous.
  - Examples: Agent proceeds despite unclear acceptance criteria (e.g., locales, time zones, error
   ,→  thresholds) then is corrected later.

- improper˙tool˙use˙or˙setup: Misused tools/commands or had missing/incorrect dependencies/setup.
  - Examples: wrong command syntax, using inappropriate tools for the task

- loop˙behavior: Repeats the same failed action 3+ times without strategy change.
  - Examples: repeat the same failed action 3+ times without changing approach).

- insufficient˙testing: Skipped reasonable verification/tests for non-trivial or risky changes (note: trivial
 ,→   edits may be acceptable).
  - Examples: No run/validation for a new parser; no check that a migration applies cleanly; no sanity
   ,→  check of output.


                                                     24
- insufficient˙debugging: Did not investigate or reduce failing behavior when needed to make progress.
  - Examples: Ignores stack trace; no isolation of failure; proceeds while errors persist.

- incomplete˙implementation: Delivered unfinished or non-functioning work.
  - Examples: TODO/FIXME left; stub methods; code that cannot run.

- file˙management˙errors: Wrong paths, overwrites, misplaced/extra files (including unnecessary files).
  - Examples: Writes into wrong directory; overwrites config; creates unwanted artifacts.

- scope˙creep: Implemented unrequested features without approval.
  - Examples: Adds a dashboard or endpoint not asked for.

- risky˙actions˙or˙permission: Risky steps without user's explicit consent.
  - Examples: git push to main; deleting existing files in a repo (deleting files created by agent itself is
   ,→  fine); altering credentials.

- other˙agent˙issue: Any agent-side problem not covered above.

INFRASTRUCTURE (EXTERNAL vs AGENT-CAUSED)
- infrastructure˙external˙issue: Environment/platform limits outside agent control.
  - Examples: Provider outage; disk full on managed runner; missing enterprise API key; network
   ,→  failure not caused by agent.

- infrastructure˙agent˙caused˙issue: Infrastructure fault introduced by the agent's prior actions.
  - Examples: Agent leaves a server running on port 8000; later start on 8000 fails; agent fills the disk
   ,→  with logs earlier, causing later writes to fail.

========================
QUALITY STANDARDS
========================
- Evidence Threshold: Mark TRUE only with specific evidence; prefer short quotes.
- Conservative Defaults: When uncertain, mark FALSE and briefly explain why.
- No speculation: Tie every flagged issue to observable behavior or quoted text.
“end–verbatim˝

“textbf–First User Message˝

“begin–verbatim˝
=== BEGIN OF CONVERSATION TO ANALYZE ===
[agent trajectory]
=== END OF CONVERSATION TO ANALYZE ===

Fill the annotate˙conversation function.

Goal
- Set only the booleans that clearly apply.

What to record
1) Agent behavioral issues (select all that apply)



                                                     25
  - misunderstood˙intention, did˙not˙follow˙instruction, insufficient˙analysis, insufficient˙clarification,
    improper˙tool˙use˙or˙setup, loop˙behavior, insufficient˙testing, insufficient˙debugging,
    incomplete˙implementation, file˙management˙errors, scope˙creep, risky˙actions˙or˙permission,
    other˙agent˙issue.
  - Rationale: cite code/commands/errors or a short quote and explain in one sentence.

2) Infrastructure
  - infrastructure˙external˙issue˙detected for environment/platform limits beyond agent control.
  - infrastructure˙agent˙caused˙issue˙detected for faults introduced by the agent's prior actions (e.g.,
   ,→   orphaned server on port 8000).
  - Rationale: include the error/status line or brief description.


Evidence & quality
- Prefer concrete, minimal quotes; avoid speculation. If evidence is insufficient, leave the flag false.

Quick disambiguation (common splits)
- insufficient˙analysis vs insufficient˙clarification: didn't look for existing work vs didn't ask when
 ,→  requirements were ambiguous.
- insufficient˙testing vs insufficient˙debugging: skipped reasonable verification vs didn't investigate a
 ,→  failing state enough to make progress.
Tool definition
SentimentPrediction = ClassificationPrediction[Literal[”Positive”, ”Negative”, ”Neutral”]]

TaskTypePrediction = ClassificationPrediction[
   Literal[
      ”Fix Bugs”,
      ”Implement Features”,
      ”Create Programs from Scratch”,
      ”Fix Failing Continuous Integration”,
      ”Fix Merge Conflicts”,
      ”Write Documentation”,
      ”Perform Deployments”,
      ”Perform Data Analysis”,
   ]
]

DevClusterPrediction = ClassificationPrediction[
  Literal[
     ”Web Development”,
     ”DevOps & Infrastructure”,
     ”AI Integration”,
     ”Code Management”,
  ]
]

FEATURES = [
  # --- Generic Questions ---
  Feature(



                                                     26
  name=”user˙goal˙summary”,
  description=”One sentence describing what the user is trying to accomplish.”,
  prediction˙type=TextPrediction
),
Feature(
   name=”overall˙sentiment”,
   description=”Classify the overall sentiment of the user's messages.”,
   prediction˙type=SentimentPrediction
),
Feature(
   name=”task˙type”,
   description=(
      ”Classify the type of task into exactly one category. ”
      ”Choose from: Fix Bugs, Implement Features, Create Programs from Scratch, ”
      ”Fix Failing Continuous Integration, Fix Merge Conflicts, Write Documentation, ”
      ”Perform Deployments, Perform Data Analysis.”
   ),
   prediction˙type=TaskTypePrediction
),
Feature(
   name=”dev˙cluster”,
   description=(
      ”Choose the best-fitting development cluster: ”
      ”Web Development (frontend/backend, UI/UX, e-commerce), ”
      ”DevOps & Infrastructure (CI/CD, Docker/Kubernetes, cloud, env config), ”
      ”AI Integration (OpenAI/Anthropic/Gemini APIs, ML systems), ”
      ”Code Management (Git ops, PRs, docs, bug fixes, features).”
   ),
   prediction˙type=DevClusterPrediction
),

# --- AGENT BEHAVIORAL ISSUES ---
Feature(
   name=”misunderstood˙intention”,
   description=”Agent misunderstood the user's goal/intent. Examples: User asked for a summary;
    ,→    agent produced a rewrite; user wanted high-level bullets; agent delivered full code.”,
   prediction˙type=BinaryPrediction
),
Feature(
   name=”did˙not˙follow˙instruction”,
   description=(
       ”Agent ignored or failed to comply with explicit instructions/system constraints. ”
       ”Examples: User: 'Do NOT push to main.' Agent pushes; System says not to create a PR
        ,→   unless the user asks and the user didn't ask; ”
       ”agent creates a PR; user asked for bullet points only, agent gives long prose.”
   ),
   prediction˙type=BinaryPrediction
),
Feature(
   name=”insufficient˙analysis”,



                                             27
   description=(
      ”Didn't explore existing materials (prior code/docs/examples) before acting. Examples: User
       ,→  points to an existing function/file that is relevant or already solves it; agent reinvents it.”
   ),
   prediction˙type=BinaryPrediction
),
Feature(
   name=”insufficient˙clarification”,
   description=(
       ”Failed to ask necessary questions before acting when requirements were ambiguous. ”
       ”Examples: Agent proceeds despite unclear acceptance criteria (locales, time zones, error
        ,→  thresholds) then is corrected later.”
   ),
   prediction˙type=BinaryPrediction
),
Feature(
   name=”improper˙tool˙use˙or˙setup”,
   description=(
       ”Misused tools/commands or used inappropriate tools; missing/incorrect dependencies/setup.
        ,→  ”
       ”Examples: wrong command syntax; using an inappropriate tool; import errors; wrong API
        ,→  URL; malformed auth header.”
   ),
   prediction˙type=BinaryPrediction
),
Feature(
   name=”loop˙behavior”,
   description=”Repeats the same failed action 3+ times without strategy change.”,
   prediction˙type=BinaryPrediction
),
Feature(
   name=”insufficient˙testing”,
   description=(
       ”Skipped reasonable verification/tests for non-trivial or risky changes (trivial edits may be
        ,→  acceptable). ”
       ”Examples: No run/validation for a new parser; no check that a migration applies cleanly; no
        ,→  sanity check of output.”
   ),
   prediction˙type=BinaryPrediction
),
Feature(
   name=”insufficient˙debugging”,
   description=”Did not investigate or reduce failing behavior when needed to make progress.
    ,→    Examples: Ignores stack trace; no isolation of failure; proceeds while errors persist.”,
   prediction˙type=BinaryPrediction
),
Feature(
   name=”incomplete˙implementation”,
   description=”Delivered unfinished or non-functioning work. Examples: TODO/FIXME left; stub
    ,→    methods; code that cannot run.”,


                                                  28
       prediction˙type=BinaryPrediction
    ),
    Feature(
       name=”file˙management˙errors”,
       description=”Wrong paths, overwrites, misplaced/extra (unnecessary) files. Examples: writes
        ,→    into wrong directory; overwrites config; creates unwanted artifacts.”,
       prediction˙type=BinaryPrediction
    ),
    Feature(
       name=”scope˙creep”,
       description=”Implemented unrequested features without approval. Examples: adds a dashboard
        ,→    or endpoint not asked for.”,
       prediction˙type=BinaryPrediction
    ),
    Feature(
       name=”risky˙actions˙or˙permission”,
       description=(
           ”Risky steps without the user's explicit consent. Examples: git push to main; deleting existing
            ,→   files in a repo (deleting files created by the agent itself is fine); altering credentials.”
       ),
       prediction˙type=BinaryPrediction
    ),
    Feature(
       name=”other˙agent˙issue”,
       description=”Any other agent-side problem not covered above.”,
       prediction˙type=BinaryPrediction
    ),

    # --- INFRASTRUCTURE ---
    Feature(
       name=”infrastructure˙external˙issue”,
       description=”Environment/platform limits outside agent control. Examples: provider outage; disk
        ,→    full on a managed runner; missing enterprise API key; network failure not caused by agent.”,
       prediction˙type=BinaryPrediction
    ),
    Feature(
       name=”infrastructure˙agent˙caused˙issue”,
       description=(
           ”Infrastructure faults introduced by the agent's prior actions. Examples: agent leaves server
            ,→    on port 8000 -¿ later start on 8000 fails; agent fills disk with logs -¿ later writes fail.”
       ),
       prediction˙type=BinaryPrediction
    ),
]




                                                      29
