                                         AGENTIC VB ENCH : C AN AI AGENTS C OMPLETE R EAL -
                                         W ORLD P OST-P RODUCTION TASKS ?
                                          Zongheng Cao, Yi Zheng, Rui Song, Xinyu Hu
                                          Philo Labs Research
                                          research@philolabs.ai



                                                                                     A BSTRACT




arXiv:2605.27705v1 [cs.CR] 26 May 2026
                                                  Video production workflows offer a rich and demanding arena for evaluating
                                                  multimodal AI agents: they require composite capabilities across text, image,
                                                  audio, and video understanding, along with long-horizon planning, and tool use. To
                                                  this end, we introduce AgenticVBench, a benchmark of 100 agentic tasks across 4
                                                  task families spanning the real world post-production workflow, constructed from
                                                  real production workflows contributed by 20 industry experts averaging 6 years
                                                  of professional experience. Both the tasks and their evaluation specifications are
                                                  authored by these experts, combining programmatic verifiers and expert rubrics.
                                                  We evaluate frontier vision-language models (VLMs) with both vendor-native and
                                                  open-source harnesses. The best evaluated agent stack barely crosses 30%, far
                                                  below human expert performance on the same tasks. We further find that the choice
                                                  of harness substantially affects model behavior, including scores, tool-use patterns,
                                                  and failure modes. AgenticVBench provides a foundation for diagnosing and
                                                  improving both models and harnesses for agentic video production. Benchmark
                                                  website: https://agenticvbench.com.



                                         1   I NTRODUCTION

                                         Video production, a domain of substantial economic and cultural value, is increasingly empowered
                                         by AI agents, from creator tools and general-purpose video agents (Liang et al., 2025; Li et al., 2026)
                                         to professional studio post-production. State-of-the-art AI agents are moving beyond single-shot
                                         question answering (QA) to long-horizon tasks that combine visual and audio perception (Sakshi et al.,
                                         2024), semantic and narrative reasoning (Fu et al., 2026), retrieval over long video contexts (Zhou
                                         et al., 2025), and editing and production workflows. However, current multimodal benchmarks
                                         focus on perception and reasoning through single-shot QA settings (Fu et al., 2025; Yue et al., 2024;
                                         Huang et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024), while existing agentic benchmarks focus mainly on software
                                         engineering rather than multimodal video-production workflows (Zhou et al., 2023; Koh et al., 2024;
                                         Xie et al., 2024; Jimenez et al., 2024; Merrill et al., 2026). None effectively measure the composite
                                         capabilities demanded by real-world video production workflows. This gap hinders systematic model
                                         and harness design for video agents.
                                         To address this gap, we introduce AgenticVBench, a benchmark evaluating video agents on four
                                         task families that span post-production: Assembly, selecting clips that match a storyboard; Repair,
                                         finding and fixing technical defects; Sequencing, restoring the order of shuffled shots; and Repurpose,
                                         turning long source videos into brief-driven short deliverables. Figure 1 shows the details of the
                                         four task families in AgenticVBench. The task families are authored by 20 industry experts from
                                         various scenarios of video production, including traditional film studios, AI film studios, video
                                         agent companies, and creators. Each task is equipped with verifiers co-authored by industry experts,
                                         including both objective and subjective items.
                                         AgenticVBench offers multifaceted advantages over existing multimodal benchmarks. First, task
                                         family coverage: it is the first benchmark to systematically cover four major task families of video
                                         agents across the full multimodal stack of text, image, video, and audio. Second, production realism:
                                         tasks are authored by industry experts based on professional production experience, with rigorous
                                         quality control. Third, open evaluation specification: we open-source full rubrics alongside the


                                                                                           1
Figure 1: Overview of the four task families in AgenticVBench. Assembly evaluates storyboard-
aligned shot selection and video construction, Repair focuses on defect localization and correction,
Sequencing tests causal and temporal shot ordering, and Repurpose measures long video condensation
into short-form deliverables such as recap, trailer, teaser, and social cut.


benchmark. Lastly, long-horizon difficulty: tasks span 0.5 hours to one week of human completion
time.
We evaluate 7 state-of-the-art frontier vision-language models (VLMs) with their native harnesses
(Claude Code CLI, Codex CLI, Gemini CLI) and open-source harnesses (OpenClaw, OpenCode).
The best model-harness combination scores only 31%, substantially lower than human performance
on the same tasks. We further find that the choice of harness matters, with the maximum performance
difference reaching 20pp.


2     B ENCHMARK C ONSTRUCTION

2.1   E XPERT P OOL

We recruited 20 industry experts from four distinct production contexts. The four contexts and their
respective expert backgrounds are described in Table 6 in Appendix D. All experts went through a
standardized selection process: portfolio review, video interview, and calibration training module for
task validation. The experts involved received industry-standard compensation. Collectively, these 20
experts defined the four task families, and their workflows determined the division of labor during
task and rubric authoring.

2.2   TASK FAMILY F RAMEWORK

The four task families are designed through a multi-step bottom-up pipeline. Each expert was asked
to independently draft a set of end-to-end task briefs based on their daily workflows, along with their
deliverable time windows and requirements. Our team reviewed the submission with the experts and
identified the task families that (i) correspond to long-horizon production tasks with video production
realism, and (ii) admit verifiable evaluation, either through programmatic tests or through atomic
yes/no rubrics. The second criterion rules out, for example, aesthetic evaluation without reference,
ideation without structured requirements, or other dimensions that lack reproducible measurement.
Under these two criteria, four task families that recurred across all expert contexts were retained. The
full task authoring framework is described in Section D.


                                                   2
This bottom-up framework aligns with established conventions in video editing scholarship and
anchors each task family in a common stage of post-production (Murch, 2001; Dmytryk, 1984;
Pearlman, 2009). Assembly maps to rough-cut construction, drawing on shot selection and continuity
as editors select takes against a storyboard and form the first edit. Repair maps to review and
finishing, corresponding to the physical rhythm layer as editors localize defects in an existing cut
and apply targeted corrections. Sequencing maps to narrative reorganization, requiring story and
event-rhythm reasoning to restore temporal and causal order across shuffled shots. Repurpose maps
to end-to-end compression, adding emotion and holistic editorial judgment as editors turn long source
material and a client brief into a short deliverable.
These four task families are not designed to be orthogonal. They instead provide workflow-oriented
coverage of post-production, from rough construction to final deliverable. The experimental results
in Section 3 show that frontier models and harnesses exhibit distinct failure modes across each task
family.

2.3   TASK C REATION

Once the task families are established, task creation diverges into two paths depending on the task
family.
Programmatic task families (Assembly, Repair, Sequencing). These task families have systematic
structure: Assembly consists of a storyboard plus candidate selection; Repair consists of a source
video with an injected defect; Sequencing consists of shuffled shots with a story overview. Source
video selection criteria are jointly determined by experts and the project team. Distractor generation
and defect injection protocols are designed by the team and reviewed by experts. Once protocols
are finalized, we generate tasks in batches using publicly accessible source videos; each instance
undergoes expert review as part of quality control.
Expert-authored task family (Repurpose). Repurpose tasks are open-ended, the brief is like a
realistic customer request and the deliverable has no single correct answer, making automatic task
creation infeasible. Repurpose tasks are authored by experts, including the task brief, source video
selection, and the corresponding rubrics covering format, visual, narrative and sound pillars.
Rubrics follow a similar dual-track design, each track corresponds to a different verification method:
Programmatic verifiers are used for Assembly, Repair, Sequencing, and the Format pillar of
Repurpose. Experts provide domain-specific standards, and the team operationalizes these into
deterministic checks.
Expert rubrics are used for the Visual, Narrative, and Sound pillars of Repurpose. These are authored
by experts; the team performs formatting and atomicity review. All rubric items are binary (Yes/No),
so grading does not rely on the grader’s free-form judgment.
All source videos come from public channels. In the entire task creation process, experts contribute
workflow knowledge - task types, deliverable standards, and project timeline from daily production -
rather than specific client projects from their own portfolios. Each task instance is built independently
from publicly accessible source videos and contains no proprietary client material.

2.4   TASK FAMILY: A SSEMBLY

Task Definition. For each task in this family, there is a storyboard with 3-6 slots. Each slot is defined
according to a shot description and four cinematic variables: shot size, camera angle, lens size, and
camera movement (Liu et al., 2025). The agent receives a shuffled set of candidate clips. For each slot,
there is one golden clip extracted from the original source video and a few AI-generated distractors.
The agent is asked to select the candidate clip that best matches each storyboard slot, then assemble
the selected clips, and finally submit the integrated video.
Distractor Design. We create each distractor by modifying the original source slot along exactly one
cinematic dimension. This design requires the agent to inspect fine-grained cinematic dimensions,
rather than relying on coarse-grained video content matching. Distractors are generated by first
regenerating the initial frame using Nano Banana Pro (Google, 2025), followed by image-to-video
generation using Seedance 2.0 (Seedance et al., 2026). We discard audio from candidate clips because


                                                   3
current AI video regeneration cannot preserve the original audio, and hence could be exploited by
agents to get the result without analysis.
Source Video Selection. We take submissions from the 2025 Runway AI Film Festival as source
material for two considerations. First, the shortlisted films cover a wide range of visual styles,
including realistic, cartoon, anime, narrative, and abstract forms. In addition, because the source
videos are AI-generated, the distractors mimic the golden clips in a more natural way, reducing cues
that could make the task easier.
Evaluation. Each task is scored with adjustment for randomness. r is the proportion of storyboard
slots for which the agent selects the correct clip, and let k be the number of candidate clips per slot.
The score is
                                                     r − 1/k
                                          score =                                                   (1)
                                                     1 − 1/k
A score of 0 corresponds to random selection, and a score of 1 corresponds to selecting the correct
clip for every slot.
Coverage. 18 stories, from 9 source films, with an average of 4.00 storyboard slots per story. Each
slot has 1 golden and 2 distractor variants, and a total of 216 candidate clips in the task family.

2.5   TASK FAMILY: R EPAIR

Task Definition. Inputs include a broken video with an injected defect and a repair prompt. The
prompt includes the client request style issues in the broken video but does not explicitly name the
precise timestamp or defect type. The agent needs to localize and identify the defect, submit a fixed
video and generate a report; the report should include the reasoning process including the type and
timestamps.
Defect Families. Corruptions span three groups: audio defects (background noise, room echoes,
loud-audio distortion), visual defects (color shifts, blurriness, lost sharpness), and timeline defects
(out-of-order shots, spoken filler words, repeated frames, and factually-wrong sentences). Each
corruption affects one time window inside the clip; the rest is clean.
Source Video Selection. All source clips are human-authored professional video, drawn from movies
and animated films, broadcast news, TV sketch, music video, ads, and YouTube creator content (tech
reviews, vlogs, educational, interviews).
Evaluation. A programmatic verifier gives each task one reward between 0 and 1. For every
measurement we use, the broken input the agent receives scores 0 and the bundled golden reference
scores 1, and the agent’s output is placed linearly between the two. For audio and visual defects,
the corruption sits in a known time window inside the clip; the reward primarily measures how well
the agent fixed that window, with a smaller term that penalizes changes to the rest of the clip. For
timeline defects, the agent reports a list of time ranges to remove or rearrange, and the reward is
the fraction of those ranges that match the ground truth, gated by a check that the rendered output
actually matches the reported edits. The reward drops to 0 if the output is missing, malformed, or a
verbatim copy of the broken input. Full per-family formulas are in Appendix H.1.
Coverage. 18 tasks across three groups: audio defects, visual defects, and timeline defects.

2.6   TASK FAMILY: S EQUENCING

Task Definition. Given a brief story overview and a set of shuffled clips from a source video, the
agent is asked to recover the correct narrative order. Two expected outputs: the reordered video, and
the predicted clip ordering.
Task Construction. For each task, we divide a longer video into 7 − 20 clips. These clips are
randomly shuffled before being provided to the agent, along with a short description (1-2 sentences
of the ordered video. The source pool consists of videos including more than 15 content categories:
AI-generated films, commercials, cinematic-shot examples and more. This design tests whether
agents can navigate narrative order by integrating multimodal continuity.
Evaluation. Score is calculated by comparing the predicted clip order to the ground-truth order using
three metrics: normalized distance (ND), longest increasing subsequence (LIS), and adjacent fidelity


                                                   4
(ADJ). ND measures the normalized total displacement of clips, LIS measures the largest correctly
ordered narrative backbone, and ADJ measures whether local clip-to-clip transitions are preserved.
The final score is
                                score = (1 − ND) · LIS · ADJ.                                  (2)
Here a multiplicative score is used to penalize random orderings sharply, while rewarding predictions
only when they achieve high alignment across three metrics. Detailed formula definitions are provided
in Appendix H.2.
Coverage. 28 accepted sequence instances from 27 source videos, averaging 13.71 clips per instance.

2.7   TASK FAMILY: R EPURPOSE

Task Definition. Input consists of a source video with a length of 4 minutes to 3 hours and a
creative brief markdown. The brief briefly states the source video’s content, audience profile, target
platform and the deliverables. It also describes the desired tone, mood, and pacing and specifies “hard”
delivery requirements: runtime, aspect ratio, container format, and audio inclusion. The brief offers
limited creative directions depending on the source video. The agent needs to deliver a standalone
short-form repurposed video (e.g., recap, trailer, teaser, or social cut) that follows these constraints
while preserving the key content of the source.
Source Video Selection. The core challenge of the Repurpose task is long-horizon compression:
deciding what to retain, discard, and restructure from tens of minutes of source footage. We sample
four content types with different editorial demands: talks stress argument compression, narrative
shorts stress plot and emotional continuity, sports broadcasts stress action tracking and reframing,
and music performances stress rhythmic alignment.
Evaluation. Each task is evaluated with approximately 30 binary rubrics totaling roughly 36 points.
The rubric has five pillars: Format checks hard delivery requirements with a programmatic verifier;
Visual checks scene preservation, color and lighting continuity, and transition legibility; Narrative
checks story arcs, key beats, turns, and reveals; Sound checks audio quality, voice consistency,
synchronization, and audio arcs; and optional Penalty items deduct for critical violations that make
the deliverable hard to follow or outside the brief.
Coverage. 36 tasks across four content type breakdown, total number of 1,069 rubric items, average
∼30 items per task.

2.8   Q UALITY C ONTROL

Each candidate task passes four quality-control(QC) gates before entering the scored benchmark.
Authoring QC checks that the brief is a realistic production request, that the expected deliverable is
feasible under the task budget, and that each rubric item is observable from the submitted artifacts.
Asset QC checks that videos decode cleanly with ffprobe, that prompts and manifests refer only
to files present in the task bundle, and that source provenance and license metadata are recorded.
Expert QC requires review by the task author and by an independent reviewer from the expert pool
or project team; items marked ambiguous, non-atomic, or outside the stated brief are revised or
removed. Verifier QC runs golden-path and adversarial submissions through the scorer to check for
parser failures, reward leakage, and zero-floor behavior.
The final benchmark contains only accepted instances: 18 Assembly, 18 Repair, 28 Sequencing,
and 36 Repurpose tasks. Candidate instances that fail source-readiness, artifact-integrity, or rubric-
atomicity checks are not included in any denominator. Appendix D describes recruitment and
calibration, and Appendix F describes the agreement statistics used for Repurpose rubric validation.

3     E XPERIMENTS AND A NALYSIS
We evaluate 7 frontier vision-language models (Claude Opus 4.7, Claude Sonnet 4.6, GPT-5.5, GPT-
5.4-mini, Gemini 3.1 Pro, Gemini 3 Flash, and Qwen3-VL-235B-A22B-Instruct) in 20 model-harness
combinations on a curated set of 100 tasks (Repurpose 36, Sequencing 28, Repair 18, Assembly 18).
Each model runs on two open-source harnesses (OpenCode and OpenClaw); models with first-party
scaffolding additionally run on their vendor-native harness (Claude on Claude Code, GPT on Codex,


                                                   5
Gemini on Gemini CLI). Qwen has no vendor-native option. Each (model, harness, task) cell runs
K=3 times under a fixed tool schema, identical inputs, matching rollout limits, and shared random
seeds (Appendix A). Per-task-family scores are normalized to [0, 1]. Failed rollouts (cells where the
harness produced no usable output) are scored as 0. We additionally collect expert deliverables on
the same tasks as a human-baseline reference (Appendix C).

3.1   M AIN R ESULTS




Figure 2: Mean score per (model, harness) combination on four video production task families. Red
dashed line: expert human reference. The agent-expert gap is 43 to 65 percentage points across
families. GPT-5.5 wins every task family; Codex is the winning harness on three of four, with
OpenClaw winning Sequencing.


Agents in our matrix complete the video production tasks. An agent given a 12-minute film and a brief
produces a watchable .mp4 with cuts, narration, and shot transitions; the best stack on Assembly
grounds shots at 0.38 (roughly half of expert), and the best on Repair localizes defect windows at
0.30. The headroom is substantial: Repurpose shows the largest gap at 65 pp (best stack 0.30 vs
expert 0.95), while Assembly shows the smallest at 43 pp (best stack 0.38 vs expert 0.81). The same
model can produce substantially different scores under different harnesses, and the variation across
harness, vendor pairing, and modality routing is the subject of next section.

3.2   M ODEL B EHAVIOR

This section looks at two things: how each combo’s tool use breaks down, and what failures look like.

Per-model traits. Plotting median trajectory length against tool concentration (Figure 3) and
reading individual trajectories together surface three behaviors that recur across (model, harness)
cells. Smart parallelizers (GPT-5.5) build composite frame strips and inspect them in a single
view_image call instead of reading frames one-by-one, and bundle several edit operations into a
single Python function where other models drive the same operations through multiple shell turns.
Extreme detailists (Claude Opus 4.7, Sonnet 4.6) read many frames before writing a plan, then
proactively recheck the deliverable and patch their own errors before submission. Direct executors


                                                 6
(Gemini 3.1 Pro, Qwen3-VL-235B-A22B-Instruct) start issuing actions before reading enough
context, lock onto one tool, and submit without rechecking.




Figure 3: Behavioral signature per (model, harness) combination. X: median tool calls per rollout.
Y: share of all calls allocated to the single most-used tool. Bubble size: Repurpose score. Color:
harness. Three archetypes separate cleanly. Smart parallelizer (low calls, low concentration): the
agent spreads work across multiple tools. Extreme detailist (high calls, mid-high concentration): the
agent over-investigates by repeatedly re-reading the same files. Direct executor: the agent locks onto
a single tool and never diversifies.


Failure mode summary. Reading the failed trajectories surfaces four recurring reasons (Table 1).
Repurpose fails most often through long-context information loss: agents burn the rollout budget on
full-source whisper transcription or repeated frame thumbnailing and never reach the assembly step.
Repair’s dominant failure is temporal reasoning: agents render a valid .mp4 but pick the wrong cut
window, with median ∆start from 15 to 100+ seconds. Modality misalignment (audio defect unfixed;
narration over silent films) and hallucinated grounding (wrong scene; fabricated premise) round
out the top four. The mix is sharply task-dependent, so reporting failures as a single rate misroutes
engineering effort.

            Failure reason                                   Repurpose (%)    Repair (%)
            Long-context information loss                                83            0
            Temporal reasoning                                            1           65
            Modality misalignment                                        10           24
            Hallucinated grounding                                        6           11
            n failures                                                  153          237


                     Table 1: Top four failure reasons on Repurpose and Repair.


3.3   H ARNESS AS A F IRST-O RDER VARIABLE

End-to-end agent performance is determined jointly by the model and the harness. Two sub-findings
make this concrete: holding the model fixed produces a substantial within-model spread, and current
harnesses are not multimodal-native at the action layer.

Same model, different harness, substantial spread. Holding the model fixed and varying the
harness shifts GPT-5.5’s Assembly score by 20 pp (38 / 37 / 18 on Codex / OpenCode / OpenClaw),


                                                  7
comparable to the gap between adjacent models on the leaderboard (Figure 4a). The score pattern
reflects how each harness wraps the planner, not just what tools it ships. Codex interleaves reasoning
blocks with tool calls (reasoning-to-action ratio 0.4 on GPT-5.5, 1.0 on GPT-5.4-mini); paired with
GPT-5.5, this deliberative loop wins three of four families (Repurpose, Repair, Assembly). OpenClaw
routes modality work to sub-models (vision to a sub-VLM, narration to OpenAI TTS), so the planner
can focus on narrative-beat reasoning across many clips; this wins Sequencing, but the planner never
sees pixels directly and the harness drops by half on Assembly. Claude Code’s Plan and TodoWrite
tools force the agent to write and revise a plan as it works, keeping Opus 4.7 competitive across
families through deep state-tracking (Appendix B.2). OpenCode is cache-first: per-turn input tokens
drop close to zero after warmup while cache reads stay at 15-27K, which keeps long bash / read
loops stable and fits Repair’s ffmpeg pipelines. Gemini CLI is the leanest of the five, with zero
planning artifacts and no orchestration of its own, so 3.1 Pro holds 0.12-0.25 across families while
Flash drops to 0.03 on Sequencing with nothing to fall back on.

Harnesses are not multimodal-native. The model can only use what the harness exposes. Open-
Code paired with Qwen3-VL-235B-A22B scores 0.009 on Assembly while the same model on
OpenClaw scores eight times higher (Figure 4b); the gap is harness-attributable on a fixed model,
though we do not have Assembly traces to attribute the precise routing or tool-discovery differ-
ence. OpenClaw is the only harness in our matrix that ships typed primitives for image, tts,
music_generate, and video_generate, routed through harness-managed sub-models. The
other four expose only generic shell, file, and (in some cases) view-image tools, leaving the agent
to compose multimodal pipelines from scratch. OpenClaw’s typed primitives let it win Sequencing
through cleaner narrative-beat reasoning over many clips; the sub-model routing also costs pixel
detail on Assembly, where OpenClaw drops 20 pp from the Codex pairing. What looks like a model
gap on a given cell is often a harness gap, and typed multimodal primitives are the architectural
direction the field has not yet committed to.




      (a) GPT-5.5 within-model harness spread.        (b) Open-source VLM across open-source harnesses.

Figure 4: Two harness effects on a fixed model. (a) GPT-5.5 across three harnesses (Codex,
OpenCode, OpenClaw) on the four task families: within-model harness spread ∆ reaches 0.20 on
Assembly, comparable to the gap between adjacent models on the leaderboard. (b) Same model
(Qwen3-VL-235B-A22B-Instruct) on Assembly: 0.009 on OpenCode versus 0.073 on OpenClaw.
The eight-fold gap on a fixed model points to a harness-level incompatibility between OpenCode and
Qwen3-VL that does not appear when OpenCode hosts other models.


3.4    A BLATION

To probe what limits each task family, for every family we select the top-5 (model, harness) combina-
tions from Section 3 and run each combination K=3 times. The intervention is either an oracle hint
added to the instruction or a single instruction field stripped.
Repair: localization and tool use are joint bottlenecks. Repair decomposes into two sub-skills:
localization (finding where the defect is) and tool use (planning and applying the fix). Providing
an oracle defect location isolates the second step and lifts the mean Repair score by +13 pp. The
remaining gap reflects domain-specific tool use: defects such as color grading, super-resolution, and
audio restoration require professional editing operations that the oracle does not address.


                                                  8
Sequencing: visual-temporal reasoning is the bottleneck. Sequencing requires reconstructing
narrative order from visual and temporal cues combined with causal reasoning over the source
content. Prepending a paragraph-long narrative description simplifies the task to a video-captioning
comparison, where the agent only needs to match each clip to its described beat. Even with this
simplification, providing the narrative lifts mean Sequencing score by only +22 pp, indicating that
multimodal visual-temporal reasoning remains a real constraint for current agents.
Assembly: agents rely on description, not cinematic detail. Stripping the per-slot description
field drops mean Assembly score by 27 pp, while stripping camera_movement moves the mean
by 1 pp. The cinematic-shorthand fields (shot size, camera angle, lens size, camera movement)
contribute essentially nothing on top of the prose description. By contrast, human editors treat these
cinematic fields as the primary variables when matching candidate clips to a storyboard, revealing a
gap between how agents currently solve Assembly and how the task is solved professionally.
Repurpose: long video understanding remains challenging. Repurpose covers a wide range of
source video types including films of all genres, music videos, sports broadcasts, and talks, with
source durations up to several hours. Long video understanding is the binding challenge for current
multimodal agents: prepending an editor’s reference document with comprehensive narrative notes
for each scene, what happened, and the connections between them yields a +23 pp lift on the frontier-
floor task comedy_knead. The lift is most pronounced for films with complex logical cues such as
the non-linear narrative in Mulholland Drive, where the agent cannot recover the intended structure
from the raw source video alone.


4   R ELATED WORK

Multimodal benchmarks. Image and video QA benchmarks test perception and reasoning through
single-pass question answering or short-form responses (Yue et al., 2024; Fu et al., 2025; Zhou et al.,
2025; Zhang et al., 2025). More specialized benchmarks target cinematic understanding (Liu et al.,
2025) and audio-visual reasoning (Sakshi et al., 2024). These benchmarks are useful for measuring
what a model can understand from images, video, or audio, but they do not require the model to plan
over many steps, interact with an editing workspace, call external tools, or produce a finished media
artifact. AgenticVBench instead evaluates whether multimodal understanding can be converted into
concrete production actions.
Agentic benchmarks. Agentic benchmarks measure long-horizon planning and tool use, but existing
work mainly targets browser and desktop control (Zhou et al., 2023; Koh et al., 2024; Xie et al.,
2024), code and command-line workflows (Jimenez et al., 2024; Merrill et al., 2026), and general
task assistance (Mialon et al., 2023; Patwardhan et al., 2026). They establish the value of evaluating
models inside tool-using environments, where success depends on planning, state tracking, and
recovery from intermediate errors. However, they do not target video production workflows, where
agents must inspect audiovisual material, preserve continuity and narrative structure, manipulate
media files, and satisfy both technical and editorial requirements. AgenticVBench extends agentic
evaluation to this multimodal production setting.
Video generation and editing. Video-generation benchmarks score visual fidelity, temporal con-
sistency, and physical plausibility (Huang et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024). Single-instruction video
editing benchmarks evaluate the quality of a particular edit over one (source video, prompt) pair at
a time (Sun et al., 2025; Li et al., 2025; Chen et al., 2025a; Gao et al., 2026; Chen et al., 2025b;
Wu et al., 2025), situated within a broader video-editing literature (Sun et al., 2024; Song et al.,
2023). These benchmarks characterize the quality ceiling of a video model or editing tool, but do
not evaluate whether an agent can decide which operations are needed, choose and sequence assets,
localize defects, and apply tools across a multi-step production task. In contrast, AgenticVBench
evaluates end-to-end agentic video production.


5   D ISCUSSION AND C ONCLUSION

Limitations and Future work. Our evaluation covers frontier models and a focused set of vendor-
native and open-source harnesses. Many capable models, editing tools, and agent frameworks are
not included because of compute, cost, and access constraints. The benchmark also has scope limits:


                                                  9
our tasks emphasize post-production workflows represented by our expert pool and source-video
collection, and future versions should broaden coverage across languages, regions, genres, production
styles, and professional conventions. In addition, some task families rely on public media assets and
evolving model APIs, so maintaining reproducibility will require versioned releases, stable verifier
code, and careful documentation of source provenance.
A second limitation is that video production contains both objective and subjective dimensions. Our
programmatic verifiers cover mechanically checkable requirements, while expert rubrics capture
editorial criteria that are difficult to reduce to deterministic tests. Although this design reflects
real production practice, future work should further study rubric sensitivity, inter-rater agreement,
source-grounding, and robustness to shallow or format-only solutions. More broadly, a benchmark
for video-editing automation has labor-market implications for the same production roles represented
in our expert pool. The current gap to expert performance suggests that deployment should remain
human-supervised. We release AgenticVBench as a diagnostic tool for studying model and harness
failures, improving provenance and reproducibility, and supporting safer evaluation of agentic video
systems.
Conclusion. AgenticVBench introduces a 100-task expert-authored benchmark for agentic video
post-production across Assembly, Repair, Sequencing, and Repurpose. Tasks span 0.5 hours to one
week of expert effort and require composite reasoning over text, image, audio, and video, together
with long-horizon planning and tool use. Our results show that current frontier agent systems
remain far from expert performance: the best stack reaches under half of expert performance, and
failures vary substantially across task families. We further find that harness design is a first-order
factor, affecting both scores and failure modes. These results suggest that progress in agentic video
production will require not only stronger multimodal models, but also better tool interfaces, state
management, verification, and workflow-aware harness design.




                                                 10
R EFERENCES
Yinan Chen, Jiangning Zhang, Teng Hu, Yuxiang Zeng, Zhucun Xue, Qingdong He, Chengjie
  Wang, Yong Liu, Xiaobin Hu, and Shuicheng Yan. Ivebench: Modern benchmark suite for
  instruction-guided video editing assessment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.11647, 2025a.
Yupeng Chen, Penglin Chen, Xiaoyu Zhang, Yixian Huang, and Qian Xie. Editboard: Towards a
  comprehensive evaluation benchmark for text-based video editing models. In Proceedings of the
  AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), volume 39, pp. 15975–15983, 2025b.
Edward Dmytryk. On Film Editing: An Introduction to the Art of Film Construction. Focal Press,
  1984.
Chaoyou Fu, Yuhan Dai, Yongdong Luo, Lei Li, Shuhuai Ren, et al. Video-mme: The first-ever
  comprehensive evaluation benchmark of multi-modal llms in video analysis. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 24108–24118,
  2025.
Chaoyou Fu, Haozhi Yuan, Yuhao Dong, Yi-Fan Zhang, Yunhang Shen, Xiaoxing Hu, Xueying
  Li, Jinsen Su, Chengwu Long, Xiaoyao Xie, et al. Video-mme-v2: Towards the next stage in
  benchmarks for comprehensive video understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.05015, 2026.
Xiangbo Gao, Sicong Jiang, Bangya Liu, Xinghao Chen, Minglai Yang, Siyuan Yang, Mingyang Wu,
  Jiongze Yu, Qi Zheng, Haozhi Wang, et al. Vefx-bench: A holistic benchmark for generic video
  editing and visual effects. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.16272, 2026.
Google.     Nano banana pro: Gemini 3 pro image. https://blog.google/
  innovation-and-ai/products/nano-banana-pro/, November 2025. Accessed:
  2026-05-05.
Ziqi Huang, Yinan He, Jiashuo Yu, Fan Zhang, Chenyang Si, et al. Vbench: Comprehensive
  benchmark suite for video generative models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 21807–21818, 2024.
Carlos E. Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and Karthik R.
  Narasimhan. Swe-bench: Can language models resolve real-world github issues? In International
  Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2024.
Jing Yu Koh, Robert Lo, Lawrence Jang, Vikram Duvvur, Ming Lim, Po-Yu Huang, Graham Neubig,
   Shuyan Zhou, Russ Salakhutdinov, and Daniel Fried. Visualwebarena: Evaluating multimodal
   agents on realistic visual web tasks. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association
   for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 881–905, 2024.
Ke Li, Maoliang Li, Jialiang Chen, Jiayu Chen, Zihao Zheng, Shaoqi Wang, and Xiang Chen. Direct:
  Video mashup creation via hierarchical multi-agent planning and intent-guided editing. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2604.04875, 2026.
Minghan Li, Chenxi Xie, Yichen Wu, Lei Zhang, and Mengyu Wang. Five-bench: A fine-grained
 video editing benchmark for evaluating emerging diffusion and rectified flow models. In Proceed-
 ings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 16672–16681,
 2025.
Zhengyang Liang, Daoan Zhang, Huichi Zhou, Rui Huang, Bobo Li, Yuechen Zhang, Shengqiong
  Wu, Xiaohan Wang, Jiebo Luo, Lizi Liao, et al. Univa: Universal video agent towards open-source
  next-generation video generalist. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.08521, 2025.
Hongbo Liu, Jingwen He, Yi Jin, Dian Zheng, Yuhao Dong, Fan Zhang, Ziqi Huang, Yinan He,
 Yangguang Li, Weichao Chen, et al. Shotbench: Expert-level cinematic understanding in vision-
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.21356, 2025.
Mike A. Merrill, Alexander Glenn Shaw, Nicholas Carlini, Boxuan Li, Harsh Raj, et al. Terminal-
 bench: Benchmarking agents on hard, realistic tasks in command line interfaces. In International
 Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2026.


                                                 11
Grégoire Mialon, Clémentine Fourrier, Thomas Wolf, Yann LeCun, and Thomas Scialom. Gaia:
  a benchmark for general ai assistants. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2023.
Walter Murch. In the Blink of an Eye: A Perspective on Film Editing. Silman-James Press, 2001.
Tejal Patwardhan, Rachel Dias, Elizabeth Proehl, Grace Kim, Michele Wang, et al. Gdpval: Evaluat-
  ing ai model performance on real-world economically valuable tasks. In International Conference
  on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2026.
Karen Pearlman. Cutting Rhythms: Shaping the Film Edit. Focal Press, 2009.
Sakshi Sakshi, Utkarsh Tyagi, Sonal Kumar, Ashish Seth, Ramaneswaran Selvakumar, Oriol Nieto,
  Ramani Duraiswami, Sreyan Ghosh, and Dinesh Manocha. Mmau: A massive multi-task audio
  understanding and reasoning benchmark. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.19168, 2024.
Team Seedance, De Chen, Liyang Chen, Xin Chen, Ying Chen, Zhuo Chen, Zhuowei Chen, Feng
  Cheng, Tianheng Cheng, Yufeng Cheng, et al. Seedance 2.0: Advancing video generation for
  world complexity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.14148, 2026.
Bowen Song, Soo Min Kwon, Zecheng Zhang, Xinyu Hu, Qing Qu, and Liyue Shen. Solving inverse
  problems with latent diffusion models via hard data consistency. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.08123,
  2023.
Shangkun Sun, Xiaoyu Liang, Songlin Fan, Wenxu Gao, and Wei Gao. Ve-bench: subjective-aligned
  benchmark suite for text-driven video editing quality assessment. In Proceedings of the AAAI
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 39, pp. 7105–7113, 2025.
Wenhao Sun, Rong-Cheng Tu, Jingyi Liao, and Dacheng Tao. Diffusion model-based video editing:
 A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.07111, 2024.
Zihan Wang, Songlin Li, Lingyan Hao, Xinyu Hu, and Bowen Song. What you see is what matters:
  A novel visual and physics-based metric for evaluating video generation quality. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2411.13609, 2024.
Jay Zhangjie Wu, Guian Fang, Dongrong Joe Fu, Vijay Anand Raghava Kanakagiri, Forrest Iandola,
  et al. Veditbench: Holistic benchmark for text-guided video editing. arXiv preprint, 2025.
Tianbao Xie, Danyang Zhang, Jixuan Chen, Xiaochuan Li, Siheng Zhao, Ruisheng Cao, Toh J Hua,
  Zhoujun Cheng, Dongchan Shin, Fangyu Lei, et al. Osworld: Benchmarking multimodal agents
  for open-ended tasks in real computer environments. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 37:52040–52094, 2024.
John Yang, Carlos E Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan,
  and Ofir Press. Swe-agent: Agent-computer interfaces enable automated software engineering.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:50528–50652, 2024.
Xiang Yue, Yuansheng Ni, Kai Zhang, Tianyu Zheng, Ruoqi Liu, et al. Mmmu: A massive multi-
  discipline multimodal understanding and reasoning benchmark for expert agi. In Proceedings of
  the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 9556–9567,
  2024.
Zheyuan Zhang, Wanying Dou, Linkai Peng, Hongyi Pan, Ulas Bagci, and Boqing Gong. Videoads
  for fast-paced video understanding. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
  Computer Vision, pp. 21812–21821, 2025.
Junjie Zhou, Yan Shu, Bo Zhao, Boya Wu, Zhengyang Liang, et al. Mlvu: Benchmarking multi-task
  long video understanding. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 13691–13701, 2025.
Shuyan Zhou, Frank F. Xu, Hao Zhu, Xuhui Zhou, Robert Lo, et al. Webarena: A realistic web
  environment for building autonomous agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.13854, 2023.



                                                12
A      E XPERIMENTAL SETUP

This appendix records the configuration of the benchmark run and the held-constant settings across
all 20 (harness, model) combinations. The run consists of 3 independent rollout repetitions over 20
combinations on 4 task suites, executed on Modal sandboxes.

A.1    TASKS

The four task suites, their public dataset identifiers, and the verifier each invokes are listed in
Table 2. Per-task prompts and reference files are taken verbatim from each dataset’s prompt and
reference_file_urls columns; no per-(harness, model) prompt rewriting is applied.

Task         # tasks Inputs                     Required deliverable        Verifier
Repurpose      36      one source film.mp4 outputs/                         verifiers (format checks), human /
                       per task plus per-task final.mp4,                    VLM, binary rubrics
                       editorial brief        report.md
Sequencing     28      zip of N shuffled      outputs/                      verifiers.
                       *.mp4 shots plus film solution.json                  video_order.runner
                       synopsis prompt        (ordered shot list),          (footrule, LIS, adjacency, weighted
                                              assembled                     composite)
                                              solution.mp4
Repair         18      one broken.mp4 per outputs/                          verifiers.
                       task plus repair brief fixed.mp4,                    video_repair_v3.runner
                                              report.md                     (format 5, localization 35, edit 60;
                                                                            ffprobe + SSIM + xcorr,
                                                                            deterministic)
Assembly       18      zip of N candidate      outputs/                     verifiers.
                       shots, storyboard,      solution.json                video_assembly.runner
                       shot-language reference (slot-to-shot manifest),     (per-slot accuracy, deterministic)
                                               solution.mp4

Table 2: Task suites used in the benchmark. Rollouts are graded by the listed verifier where one is
available; Repurpose is graded by the multi-pillar rubric described in the main paper.


A.2    (H ARNESS , MODEL ) COMBINATIONS

The five harnesses and their pinned package versions are listed in Table 3. Harness CLI versions are
pinned by these images. Anthropic, OpenAI, and Google models are routed through each provider’s
native API; Qwen is routed through OpenRouter.

Harness             npm package               Version                  Models
claude_code         @anthropic-ai/            2.1.129                  claude-opus-4-7, claude-sonnet-4-6
                    claude-code
codex_cli           @openai/codex             0.128.0                  gpt-5.5, gpt-5.4-mini
gemini_cli          @google/gemini-cli 0.41.1                          gemini-3.1-pro-preview, gemini-3-flash-preview
opencode            opencode-ai               1.14.39                  claude-opus-4-7, claude-sonnet-4-6, gpt-5.5, gpt-
                                                                       5.4-mini, gemini-3.1-pro-preview, gemini-3-flash-
                                                                       preview, qwen3-vl-235b-a22b-instruct
openclaw            openclaw                  2026.5.4 (325df 3e)      claude-opus-4-7, claude-sonnet-4-6, gpt-5.5, gpt-
                                                                       5.4-mini, gemini-3.1-pro-preview, gemini-3-flash-
                                                                       preview, qwen3-vl-235b-a22b-instruct

Table 3: Harnesses, pinned package versions, and the models each is paired with. The pinned versions
encode each harness’s full set of hard-coded defaults: sampling parameters, system-prompt templates,
max-tokens, retry logic, and tool descriptions.


                                                    13
A.3    H ELD - CONSTANT SETTINGS

Settings in Table 4 are applied identically across all 20 combinations and all 3 reps unless explicitly
noted.

 Setting                                     Value
 Max agent iterations                        200 turns
 Per-task wallclock timeout                  1800 s (30 min)2
 Tool surface beyond agent built-ins         empty: each harness uses only its native tool set;
 (enabled_tools)
 Model parameters (temperature, top_p,       provider defaults: no override applied at any layer3
 top_k, seed, max_output_tokens)
 Per-call LLM idle timeout                   each harness’s CLI default, except openclaw raised from 120
                                             s to 300 s4
 Compute (per Modal sandbox)                 4 vCPU, 8 GB RAM; ECR worker images frozen for the duration
                                             of the run
 Workers per phase                           full dataset size (36 / 28 / 18 / 18); every task in a rep runs in
                                             parallel in its own sandbox

Table 4: Held-constant settings across the run. Bona-fide variation across reps comes only from
independent provider sampling (footnote 3).


A.4    R EPLICATION STRUCTURE

We run 3 reps per (benchmark, harness, model) cell, executed sequentially (rep 1 to rep 2 to rep 3
within a benchmark, all benchmarks within a round). For each cell, the three reps are three fresh
Modal sandboxes, each with its own random sampling realization; no state is shared across reps.

             Quantity                                                     Per rep    × 3 reps
             Rollout evals (4 benchmarks × 20 combos)                          80         240
             Verifier evals (Assembly, Sequencing, Repair only)                60         180

Table 5: Replication structure. Repurpose has no in-loop verifier; its rollouts are graded out-of-
band by the rubric described in the main paper.


B     C ASE STUDY TRAJECTORIES

We give three end-to-end trajectories chosen to illustrate the spread of agent strategies across families
and harnesses: a Sequencing rollout that triangulates clip order from three independent signals, a
Repair rollout that diagnoses a broken broadcast through semantic state-tracking, and the highest-
scoring Repurpose rollout in our matrix, which composes a 60-second deliverable end-to-end without
ever inspecting the source film.

B.1    S EQUENCING : O PEN C ODE + G EMINI 3.1 P RO REORDERS NINE SHUFFLED CLIPS WITH
       PERFECT SCORE

The task gives nine clips of a short film (Journey to the Phone Booth, 0.6–2.0 seconds each)
shuffled into random order; the agent has to recover the correct narrative ordering. Verifier score:
nd · lis · adj = 1.0 · 1.0 · 1.0 = 1.0, a perfect outcome. 67 tool calls over 22.6 minutes wallclock;
cost ≈ $1.38.

[#1]       bash      ffprobe per-clip duration               → 9 clips, 0.6-2.0 sec each
[#3]       write     extract_frames.py                       (3 frames per clip × 9 → grid.jpg)
[#4]       bash      python3 extract_frames.py
[#5]       read      /workspace/work/grid.jpg                (visual inspection of grid)


                                                   14
[#7]     bash       ffmpeg per-clip extract audio → 9 .wav files
[#13]    write      transcribe.py               (whisper.base on each clip’s audio)
[#14]    bash       python3 transcribe.py       → per-clip transcription
[#15]    write      extract_subs.py             (subtitle frame extractor via OpenCV)
[#16]    bash       python3 extract_subs.py
[#17]    read       /workspace/work/subs.jpg
[#20]    write      check_clip7.py              (verify the booth-arrival shot)
[#21]    bash       python3 check_clip7.py
         ...
[#65]    write      /workspace/output/solution.json
[#67]    bash       ls -l /workspace/output     → solution.json present

What is interesting about this trajectory. The agent triangulates ordering from three independent
signals: (i) visual frame inspection via a 9 × 3 grid of first-and-last frames, (ii) per-clip audio
transcription with Whisper that names characters and continues narrative threads across clip bound-
aries, and (iii) burned-in subtitle text detected through OpenCV that exposes sequential dialogue.
Any single signal is insufficient because the clips are short and visually similar; the combination
yields a unique ordering. OpenCode has no native vision tool, so all visual analysis is implemented
inside Python+OpenCV scripts the agent writes. The planner reads grids and subtitle stitches via
OpenCode’s read tool, which delivers each image as base64 in the conversation transcript. Despite
the indirect path, the perfect score indicates that for short-clip Sequencing the visual demand is
modest and a frame-grid plus audio plus OCR pipeline is sufficient. This is also one of the rare
cases where Gemini 3.1 Pro on a third-party harness substantially outperforms the same model on its
vendor-native pairing.

B.2   R EPAIR : C LAUDE C ODE + O PUS 4.7 DIAGNOSES A SWAPPED - SEGMENT F1 BROADCAST
      VIA LEADERBOARD MONOTONICITY

The task gives broken.mp4, a 235-second Formula 1 broadcast that has been mutated. The agent
must localize the defect window and re-render the corrected video. 86 tool calls over 18.4 minutes
wallclock; cost ≈ $4.47.
The defect is not visual (no frozen frame, no encoding glitch) but semantic: two stretches of footage
have been reordered, breaking the race’s logical state. The agent diagnoses this by reasoning over
the broadcast leaderboard’s lap counter and position list (NOR / RUS / HAM passes), which should
evolve monotonically.

[#1] Bash       ls /workspace/materials                              → broken.mp4 (130 MB, 235s)
[#2] Bash       ffprobe broken.mp4                                   → 1280×720 @ 50fps, 11750 frames
[#4] Bash       ffmpeg fps=1 thumbs/t_%04d.jpg                       (per-second thumbnails)
[#7] Bash       ffmpeg tile=15x16 contact.jpg                        (contact sheet of 240 thumbs)
[#9] Read       contact.jpg                                          (visual scan: nothing obvious)
[#14] Bash      ffmpeg select=’gt(scene,0.3)’                        (scene-cut detection)
[#19] Bash      ffmpeg showspectrumpic                               (audio spectrogram)
[#20] Read      waveform.png                                         (no audio anomaly visible)
[#22] Bash      pip install faster-whisper
[#24] Bash      whisper.base.en transcribe audio.wav                 →  commentary, lap counts,
                                                                         driver positions
[#~50] Read thumbs near suspect timestamps                            (zoom in on overlay region)
[#~60] Bash ffmpeg crop leaderboard region                           (zoom on overlay)
[#~75] Read leaderboard tiles at t~156, 176, 193                       (confirms inversion)
[#78] Bash ffmpeg -filter_complex
              [0:v]trim=0:156.46[v0];
              [0:v]trim=176.18:193.78[vB];      ← put B before A
              [0:v]trim=156.46:176.18[vA];
              [0:v]trim=193.78:235[v3];
              concat=n=4
[#79] Bash ffprobe fixed.mp4                       → 235.014s, 11750 frames
                                                       (matches source)
[#83] Write /workspace/output/report.md
[#86] text "Two stretches were swapped: the leaderboard’s lap counter
             and position list (NOR/RUS/HAM) jumped non-monotonically


                                                 15
                  across t~156.46, 176.18, 193.78, all I-frame cuts.
                  Reordering 156.46-176.18 and 176.18-193.78 makes the
                  progression monotonic again."

What is interesting about this trajectory. The agent’s diagnosis depends on reasoning about race
semantics, not on detecting a pixel-level anomaly. Visual inspection of the contact sheet reveals
nothing because the swapped stretches are visually similar to surrounding footage. The agent finds the
defect by transcribing the broadcast commentary, then cross-checking with the on-screen leaderboard
for non-monotonic state transitions. This is the deepest semantic reasoning we observe in the Repair
family. The corresponding output matches the source’s frame count exactly (11750/11750), and
the re-stitched stretches preserve audio sync. The cost is high (∼ $4.47, with ∼ 5.6M cached-read
tokens covering the long contact sheet, leaderboard zoom tiles, and full commentary transcript) but
the diagnosis is correct.

B.3    R EPURPOSE : G EMINI CLI + G EMINI 3.1 P RO COMPOSES A 60- SECOND NARRATED
       RECAP OF KNEAD

The task asks for a 60-second narrative recap of the short film KNEAD (a suburban-housewife-meets-
alien-possession comedy, 1950s setting). 21 tool calls over 8 minutes wallclock; cost ≈ $0.20.
The strategy is end-to-end procedural. The agent synthesizes narration via gtts, generates a music
bed via ffmpeg sine-wave synthesis, extracts four source clips at fixed offsets, and stitches the
package with audio-mixing in a single ffmpeg pipeline.

[#1]    shell     which espeak || festival || pyttsx3                 →       "no tts"
[#2]    shell     pip install gtts                                        ←    Google TTS fallback
[#3]    shell     ffprobe film.mp4                                        →    6:20, 1920×1080,
                                                                                24000/1001 fps
[#5]    shell     cat > generate_tts_parts.py
                   parts = [
                     ("This is Olive. She can bake circles around her husband,
                       yet somehow, she’s still trapped in her own kitchen.", 12),
                     ("She speaks her wishes plainly, ...", 11),
                     ...
                   ]
                   for txt, dur in parts: gTTS(txt).save(f"part_{i}.mp3")
[#7]    shell     ffmpeg drawtext text=’KNEAD’ fontsize=120
                                                         → title.mp4 (2s)
[#8]    shell     ffmpeg -ss 00:01:00 -t 14 -c copy clip1.mp4
                   ffmpeg -ss 00:03:00 -t 14 ...         ← 4 clips from source
                                                            at fixed offsets
[#10] shell       ffmpeg aevalsrc=’sin(2*pi*110t) +
                   sin(2*pi*164.81t) + sin(2*pi*220t)’   → music.mp3 (60s, A-minor
                                                            triad sine bed)
[#11] shell       ffmpeg -f concat → video_concat.mp4    (clip1+...+clip4+title)
[#14] shell       ffmpeg
                   -i video_concat.mp4
                   -i part1.mp3 -i part2.mp3 -i part3.mp3 -i part4.mp3 -i part5.mp3
                   -i music.mp3
                   -filter_complex
                     "[1][2][3][4][5]concat=n=5:v=0:a=1[narration];
                      [narration][6]amix=inputs=2:weights=’1 0.3’[mix]"
                   -t 60 final.mp4
[#16] shell       ffmpeg -vf fps=24 final.mp4
                                                         → final_24.mp4
                                                            (frame-rate normalize)
[#19] shell       cat > /workspace/output/report.md
[#21] shell       ffprobe final.mp4                      → 60.0s, 1920×1080, 24 fps

What is interesting about this trajectory. Every modality is synthesized inside the agent loop. The
narration is gtts, not a typed audio primitive. The music bed is a three-tone sine-wave synthesizer
in ffmpeg, not a generative audio model. The four source clips are extracted at fixed times (1:00,


                                                 16
3:00, . . .) without scene detection. The agent does extract two frame strips from the source via
ffmpeg (fps=1/60 over the whole film and fps=1/10 from the ten-minute mark onward), but
in Gemini CLI image bytes only reach the model when the agent explicitly reads the file; the agent
never issued any such read (run_shell_command is the only tool it used, and the shell calls
touching the frame directories are ls -l listings, not file reads), so no frame pixels are ever surfaced
to Gemini-3.1-Pro. The narration script is composed from the task brief alone. The cost is striking:
$0.20 versus $4.47 for the Repair trajectory in §B.2, with 87% prompt-cache hit rate over 760K total
tokens. The trajectory illustrates a recurring pattern in Repurpose: an agent can satisfy the structural
deliverable requirements (60-second .mp4, single voice-over, music bed, title card) without ever
ingesting the source visuals.

C    H UMAN BASELINE REFERENCE
The red reference line in Figure 2 reports the family-level score of human-produced deliverables.
These deliverables are graded with the same verifier modules and rubric items used for agent rollouts.
The human baseline is therefore meant to answer a narrow question: how well do trained human
editors score on the same tasks under the same scoring rules?

Task selection. Because human editing is time-consuming and costly, we collect human deliverables
on a subset of the 100-task benchmark rather than on the full set. The subset is sampled to preserve
the benchmark structure. It includes tasks from Repurpose, Sequencing, Repair, and Assembly,
and it is stratified by the same difficulty tiers, media types, and modality demands used in the full
benchmark. This prevents the reference line from being driven only by easier tasks or by one family.
The baseline should be read as a representative human reference for the evaluated task mix, not as a
complete census of human performance on every benchmark item.

Editor recruitment. Each selected task is completed independently by three human editors. Editors
are recruited from university film production programs, primarily from undergraduate and graduate
tracks in cinematography, directing, and editing. They are trained users of standard editing tools, but
they are not given privileged access to hidden answers or verifier metadata. No editor sees another
editor’s submission, and no editor sees model outputs before completing the task.

Human-facing task format. Editors receive the same source materials, creative brief, and de-
liverable requirements as the agents. We only change the presentation format so that the task can
be completed in a normal editing environment. The agent JSON prompt is converted into a PDF
brief, and machine-specific paths such as /workspace/... are rewritten into a human-readable
folder layout. The required deliverables remain the same in substance, including the rendered video,
manifest, or report files needed by the scorer.

Tool access and constraints. Human editors may use standard non-agentic production tools, such
as nonlinear editing software, media players, audio tools, and file conversion utilities. They may
not use agentic AI systems, hidden ground-truth files, or generative replacement assets unless the
task brief explicitly allows such material. This setup is intended to make the task natural for human
editors while keeping the inputs, outputs, and scoring contract aligned with the agent setting.

Grading and aggregation. Human submissions are scored with the same evaluation pipeline
used for agent submissions in Section 3. Sequencing uses verifiers.video_order.runner;
Repair       uses      verifiers.video_repair_v3.runner;                         Assembly         uses
verifiers.video_assembly.runner; and Repurpose uses the same multi-pillar
rubric. Each editor’s submission is scored independently. For each task, we take the median score
across the three editors. For each family, we average these per-task median scores to obtain the
reference value plotted in Figure 2. For rubric-graded Repurpose items, we also collect the full set of
grader decisions, aggregate results across graders, and report inter-grader agreement metrics before
reconciliation. This mirrors the agent aggregation procedure as closely as possible, so the reported
agent-human gap is not caused by using different scoring rules for humans and agents.

Interpretation. The human baseline is a comparable-task reference, not an unconstrained upper
bound. Human editors work from the same task brief and source assets, and their outputs are graded


                                                  17
by the same rubric. At the same time, humans work in a natural editing environment rather than
inside an agent harness. The reference line should therefore be interpreted as the performance of
trained human editors under matched task and scoring conditions, not as the best possible result a
professional studio team could achieve with unlimited time and tools.

Calibrated VLM-agent grader. Repurpose currently relies on human rubric grading for the Visual,
Narrative, and Sound pillars. The same recruitment pipeline supplies both the human editors who
complete tasks and the graders who evaluate Repurpose submissions, but editors do not grade their
own outputs. We collect human labels for rubric items and aggregate the results across graders. We
then tune a VLM-agent grading pipeline against these human labels so that future users can evaluate
Repurpose submissions without assembling a new human grading pool. We report the agreement rate
between the calibrated grader and held-out human labels to show that the grader is a valid proxy for
expert rubric scoring. The goal is to make community evaluation easier while keeping the scoring
anchored to human editorial judgment.


D     E XPERT RECRUITMENT AND RUBRIC AUTHORING PROTOCOL

Table 6 summarizes the final expert pool by primary affiliation, years of experience, and expertise
profile.

 Primary affiliation         # Experts Avg. yrs Expertise profile
 Traditional film studios       4          8     Classical production pipelines; commercials, short films, mu-
                                                 sic videos.
 AI film studios                4          6     Generative image/video models in filmmaking; capability
                                                 and failure modes.
 Independent creators           3         10     End-to-end social media production (100K+ followers); edit-
                                                 ing bottlenecks.
 Video AI companies             9          4     Video AI agents; system limitations, tool/MCP constraints,
                                                 long-horizon failures.

                            Table 6: Expert pool by primary affiliation (N = 20).


Recruitment funnel. We screened approximately 50 candidates and accepted 20 experts. The
screening process used a portfolio review, a short video interview, and a calibration exercise. Approx-
imately 30 candidates were filtered out before authoring. The most common reasons were insufficient
years of relevant production experience, weak or unverifiable portfolio evidence, limited responsibility
for post-production decisions, lack of familiarity with professional editing tools, inability to complete
the calibration exercise, or mismatch with the four target production contexts. Accepted experts were
compensated at market rates and assigned to authoring, review, or grading roles according to their
background.

Selection criteria. We selected experts to cover four contexts: traditional film studios, AI film
studios, independent creator workflows, and video AI companies. Candidates had to show sustained
responsibility for video production work, not only casual editing exposure. We prioritized candidates
who could explain concrete editing decisions from their own projects, identify common production
failures, and translate broad creative goals into observable deliverable requirements. For AI-focused
candidates, we also required familiarity with generative video tools or video-agent workflows, since
those experts were needed to identify realistic agent failure modes.

Calibration and role assignment. Before contributing to the benchmark, accepted experts com-
pleted a calibration module. They inspected sample source videos, wrote short task briefs, marked
ambiguous requirements, and rewrote broad criteria such as “good pacing” or “strong story arc” into
checks that could be judged from the source video, task brief, and submitted artifact. We used this
module to align terminology across experts and to assign roles. Experts with the strongest domain
match authored Repurpose briefs and rubrics. Other experts served as independent reviewers, graders,
or verifier reviewers. Experts did not grade their own deliverables.


                                                     18
Rubric authoring protocol. Rubric authoring followed a structured pass from professional judg-
ment to measurable checks. First, experts wrote the task brief and listed the criteria they would use in
a normal production review. Second, the project team and experts converted those criteria into atomic
items with explicit evidence requirements. Third, each item was checked for four properties: it had to
be grounded in the task brief, observable from the source and submitted files, answerable as Yes/No
or by a deterministic verifier, and independent of hidden author intent. Items that required taste-based
preference between two plausible edits were rewritten or removed.

Review and revision. Each candidate task passed multiple review rounds, matching the quality-
control process in Section 2.8. The authoring review checked realism, deliverable clarity, and
feasibility under the stated tool and time budget. The asset review checked media decoding, file
manifests, source provenance, license metadata, and prompt leakage. The independent review checked
ambiguity, difficulty, and rubric observability. The scoring review tested deterministic verifiers on
reference, malformed, and adversarial submissions, and tested Repurpose rubrics on calibration
examples. Low-agreement Repurpose items were split, revised for clearer evidence, or removed
before final scoring. The final release records aggregate review decisions and reason codes while
withholding expert identities and private correspondence.


E    TASK ANONYMIZATION PROTOCOL

Task bundles contain no proprietary client materials from expert portfolios. Source references are
normalized to task IDs, and public source metadata is stored separately from model-facing prompts.
For anonymized review, author identities, expert identities, and any correspondence about source
permissions are removed. The model-facing tasks contain only the assets, prompts, manifests, and
filenames required for execution.
For source videos whose license does not permit redistribution, the release provides retrieval in-
structions and cryptographic hashes for expected processed assets. This lets researchers verify
reconstruction without embedding third-party media in the paper package.


F    I NTER - EXPERT AGREEMENT

For the subjective Repurpose pillars, we collect human labels on binary rubric items and use those
labels to calibrate a VLM-agent grading pipeline for community evaluation. The paper leaderboard
still uses human expert grading for Repurpose, while the calibrated grader is maintained as a
companion tool for triage and reproducible third-party checks. Figure 5 summarizes the aggregate
agreement on the accepted 36-task Repurpose split after calibration. Agreement is high across the
three subjective pillars: 96.9% for Visual, 96.4% for Narrative, and 98.2% for Sound. Items with low
agreement are revised, split into smaller observable checks, or removed before final use.




Figure 5: Agreement rates for subjective Repurpose rubric items on the accepted 36-task split after
grader calibration.


                                                  19
G    C OMPUTE AND COST INFORMATION

The total inference cost for the full K=3 evaluation across all (model, harness) combinations on the
100-task benchmark is approximately $7,477. The dominant cost is closed-model inference through
the harnesses; remote workers run media operations such as ffmpeg, ffprobe, OCR, frame
extraction, and verifier scripts on CPU workers, and no model training or fine-tuning is performed.
We estimate API cost from raw trajectory logs rather than from provider invoices, so the numbers
should be read as reproducible list-price estimates.

Token extraction. For each rollout, we extract five token buckets: uncached input, cached in-
put, cache-write input, visible output, and reasoning output. Reasoning output is priced at the
model’s output-token rate. The extraction path depends on the harness. Claude Code uses the final
result.usage entry in claude_code.stream.jsonl; Codex uses the last token_count
event in the rollout JSONL; Gemini CLI uses the final result.stats entry; OpenClaw sums
assistant-message usage records from its raw session JSONL; and OpenCode sums assistant rows
in opencode.db. Missing or crashed trajectories with no extractable usage are kept as zero-token
rows and flagged as missing, since the provider bill for those failures cannot be recovered from the
logs.

           Model pricing key                         Input       Cached input   Cache write     Output
           claude-opus-4-7                           5.000             0.500          6.250     25.000
           claude-sonnet-4-6                         3.000             0.300          3.750     15.000
           gpt-5.5                                   5.000             0.500          5.000     30.000
           gpt-5.4-mini                              0.750             0.075          0.750      4.500
           gemini-3.1-pro                            2.000             0.200          0.000     12.000
           gemini-3-flash                            0.500             0.050          0.000      3.000
           qwen3-vl-235b-instruct                    0.200             0.200          0.200      0.880

Table 7: List prices used for cost estimates, in USD per 1M tokens. Claude cache writes use the
5-minute TTL rate. OpenAI cache-write tokens are billed at the input rate if surfaced by a harness.
Gemini costs use the base Standard tier because the logs expose cumulative per-task totals but not
every request boundary needed to apply the 200K-token tier change. Qwen cache tokens are billed at
the input rate because OpenRouter does not publish a separate cache rate for this model.


Audit coverage. The non-Repurpose audit uses three raw task slices, each run three times across the
evaluated harness and model combinations. Repurpose is computed separately from the Repurpose
rollout archive. To match the 36-task Repurpose split used in the paper, we exclude two stale
candidate task directories that remained in the raw folder from an earlier 38-task draft.

                Audit slice                  Rows Extracted Missing In toks. Out toks.        Cost
                Non-Repurpose, 3 slices, K=3 4,610       4,515        95 9.338B 69.278M $4,572.78
                Repurpose, K=3               2,160       2,100        60 5.688B 39.756M $2,904.52


Table 8: Token and cost audit summary. Input tokens sum uncached, cached, and cache-write input
buckets. Output tokens sum visible and reasoning output buckets.



                         Harness          Rows        Missing       Repurpose cost, K=3
                         OpenClaw           252              14                  $963.97
                         OpenCode           252               0                  $916.74
                         Claude Code         72               4                  $590.97
                         Codex CLI           72               0                  $335.59
                         Gemini CLI          72               2                   $97.25

Table 9: Repurpose inference cost by harness on the accepted 36-task split. Rows equal accepted
tasks times the number of model combinations for that harness.


                                                        20
Two caveats matter for interpreting these costs. First, harness-managed sub-model calls, such as
OpenClaw image or TTS routing, are counted only when the harness exposes them in the retained
usage records. Second, provider invoices can differ from our estimates because of tiering, regional
processing, retries hidden below the harness layer, or credits. The release package therefore reports
token buckets separately from dollar estimates so that future users can recompute costs with their
own pricing assumptions.


H     V ERIFIER D ESIGN

H.1     FAMILY 2: R EPAIR

Every Repair task produces one reward between 0 and 1. The verifier compares the agent’s output to
two reference points measured when the task was built: the broken input the agent receives, and a
held-out golden reference. For each measurement M the per-rollout score is
                                                                
                                          Mout − Mbroken
                              s = clip                     , 0, 1 ,
                                         Mgolden − Mbroken
with the sign flipped if a smaller value is better. A score of 0 means the agent did not improve on the
broken input; a score of 1 means the output is as good as the golden reference.

H.1.1    W INDOW SPLIT ( AUDIO AND VISUAL DEFECTS )
For families where the corruption sits in a known time window, the reward is
                                   reward = 0.9 · sin + 0.1 · sout .
The first term rewards fixing the defect inside the window; the second term penalizes the agent for
changing the clean region outside the window. Timeline-defect families use a different reward (see
below).

H.1.2    W HAT WE MEASURE INSIDE THE WINDOW
For audio defects, the in-window measurement combines a perceptual quality score (how natural the
audio sounds), an intelligibility score (how easy the speech is to understand), and a fidelity score
(how close the waveform is to the golden version). For visual defects, we compare each output frame
to the golden frame using PSNR (a pixel-wise fidelity score) and SSIM (a structural-similarity score),
restricted to the region inside the corruption window. For shot-swap defects, we compare the entire
output video to the golden via PSNR, and apply a length penalty if the output is more than 10%
shorter or longer than the golden.

H.1.3    T IMELINE - DEFECT FAMILIES
For removing filler words, cutting factually-wrong sentences, or removing repeated frames, the agent
reports a list of time ranges to cut. Scoring applies three checks: Range match. For each ground-truth
range, we find the closest predicted range without reusing predictions, and accept it iff both endpoints
land within the per-task tolerance. The score is the fraction of correctly matched ranges. Honesty
check. We reconstruct what the output should look like by dropping all reported ranges from the
source, then compare that reconstruction to the agent’s actual rendered output. If they don’t match,
the agent reported plausible ranges but rendered a different video, and this check fails. Audio check.
A cross-correlation check applies the same idea on the audio track. If either the honesty check or the
audio check fails, the reward is 0 regardless of the range match.

H.1.4    H ARD GATES
Before scoring, several sanity checks short-circuit the reward to 0: the output file is missing, the
audio sample rate or duration is wrong, the video container or codec does not match the task spec,
the range JSON is malformed, or the output is a verbatim copy of the broken input (we check both
file-identity shortcuts and near-identical content).


                                                  21
H.1.5    R EWARD OUTPUT
Each rollout produces a JSON blob with the final reward, the in-window and out-of-window com-
ponents, the corruption window, and the per-measurement details that fed the composite. The
downstream pipeline averages this reward across K=3 trials per task and reports the per-family mean
in the leaderboard.

H.2     FAMILY 3: S EQUENCING

Each Sequencing task contains n clips sampled from a coherent source-video segment. The model
receives the shuffled clips and a brief story overview, then predicts an ordering in solution.json.
The scorer compares this predicted order against the ground-truth narrative order.
Let c index a clip. Let true_rank(c) be the zero-indexed position of clip c in the ground-truth order,
and let pred_rank(c) be its zero-indexed position in the predicted order. The final Sequencing score
is
                                  score = (1 − ND) · LIS · ADJ,                                    (3)
where all three factors lie in [0, 1]. A perfect sequence receives score 1. Because the score is
multiplicative, a weak dimension cannot be hidden by strong performance on the other dimensions.

Normalized Distance. Normalized Distance (ND) measures the average displacement of clips from
their ground-truth positions:
                                P
                                   |pred_rank(c) − true_rank(c)|
                            ND = c                               .                         (4)
                                            ⌊n2 /2⌋
Here, ND = 0 indicates a perfect ordering, while larger values indicate greater global displacement.
The score uses 1 − ND so that higher values are better.

Longest Increasing Subsequence.           Let
                      q = [true_rank(c1 ), true_rank(c2 ), . . . , true_rank(cn )]
be the sequence of ground-truth ranks read in the model-predicted order. The LIS score is
                              length(longest increasing subsequence(q))
                        LIS =                                                 .                     (5)
                                                     n
This measures the largest subset of clips that the model placed in the correct relative narrative order.

Adjacent Cut Fidelity.      Adjacent Cut Fidelity (ADJ) measures local transition correctness:
               |{i ∈ {0, . . . , n − 2} : (pi , pi+1 ) is an adjacent pair in the ground-truth order}|
      ADJ =                                                                                            ,   (6)
                                                           n−1
where (p0 , . . . , pn−1 ) is the predicted clip order. A pair is counted only if it is consecutive in the
ground truth and appears in the same direction. This term penalizes broken local cuts and short-range
ordering errors.

Strict Match.    In addition to the continuous score, we report a binary strict-match metric:
                            strict = 1 [(p0 , . . . , pn−1 ) = (t0 , . . . , tn−1 )] ,                     (7)
where (t0 , . . . , tn−1 ) is the ground-truth order. This auxiliary metric equals 1 only when the entire
sequence is exactly correct.

Invalid Submissions. If solution.json is missing, malformed, or does not define a valid
permutation of the provided clips, the rollout is handled by the default evaluation policy. The
continuous score is computed only for valid predicted permutations.




                                                       22
