                                                     Ambig-DS: A Benchmark for Task-Framing
                                                        Ambiguity in Data-Science Agents


                                             Josefa Lia Stoisser1      Marc Boubnovski Martell1            Sidsel Boldsen1     Kaspar Märtens1

                                                                                      Robert Kitchen1




arXiv:2605.09698v1 [cs.AI] 10 May 2026
                                                                                        1
                                                                                            Novo Nordisk
                                                                                            London, UK



                                                                                            Abstract

                                                     As data-science agents shift from co-pilots to auto-pilots, silent misframing be-
                                                     comes a critical failure mode. Agents quietly commit to plausible but unintended
                                                     task framings, producing clean, executable artifacts that hide their incorrect assess-
                                                     ment of the task. Existing benchmarks score whether the pipeline runs, ignoring
                                                     whether the agent recognized the task was underspecified. We introduce Ambig-DS,
                                                     two diagnostic suites — one for prediction-target ambiguity (Ambig-DS-Target, 51
                                                     tasks built on DSBench, a tabular modeling benchmark) and one for evaluation-
                                                     objective ambiguity (Ambig-DS-Objective, 61 tasks built on MLE-bench, a Kaggle-
                                                     style ML competition benchmark) — constructed so that scoring uses each source
                                                     benchmark’s original evaluator. For every task we pair the original, fully specified
                                                     version with an ambiguous variant produced by controlled edits; a human-and-LLM
                                                     verification pipeline confirms each variant admits multiple plausible interpretations
                                                     with decision-relevant consequences. The suites are analyzed independently and
                                                     ambiguity lowers performance in both. Across five agents spanning efficient to
                                                     frontier-class models, we find in our controlled diagnostic setting: (i) failures are
                                                     silent commitments — wrong-target submissions on Target, wrong-metric or non-
                                                     committal baseline submissions on Objective — rather than execution errors; (ii)
                                                     allowing the agent to ask one clarifying question recovers much of the loss under
                                                     idealized conditions, suggesting missing framing information drives a substantial
                                                     part of the observed degradation; but (iii) agents cannot reliably tell when to use it:
                                                     permissive prompts induce over-asking on clear tasks, while conservative prompts
                                                     induce silent defaulting on ambiguous ones. Recognizing target and objective
                                                     underspecification, not pipeline execution, is the bottleneck missing from standard
                                                     DS-agent evaluations.


                                         1     Introduction

                                         The five frontier code-based agents we test, given a Kaggle-style prompt and the underlying CSV,
                                         commit to the wrong prediction target on 39–63% of ambiguous tasks — and do not flag the ambiguity
                                         in any of them. The pipeline executes, the model trains, the submission is well-formed, and the source-
                                         benchmark evaluator accepts the artifact as valid. We call this failure mode unflagged misframing: a
                                         coherent, executable artifact that silently solves a plausible-but-unintended task, with no signal for a
                                         downstream consumer to catch (illustrated in Appendix Figure 3).
                                         Recent code-agent benchmarks [Lai et al., 2023, Huang et al., 2024, 2023, Jing et al., 2024, Chan et al.,
                                         2024, Zhang et al., 2025a, Nathani et al., 2025, Wijk et al., 2024] measure pipeline execution under

                                         Preprint.
prompts that already fix the prediction target, output form, and evaluation metric. Real data-science
work routinely lacks these commitments [Passi and Barocas, 2019]: stakeholders supply a goal and
a dataset, and the modeler decides what counts as the target and what counts as success. Whether
agents can recognize when those decisions are underdetermined — and ask before acting — is not
measured by current benchmarks, and is the competence we evaluate.
We introduce Ambig-DS, a paired diagnostic for framing recognition: the competence of noticing
that the prompt–data observation does not justify a unique commitment, and asking before acting.
Ambig-DS holds the source-benchmark evaluator fixed and intervenes only on the prompt–data pair.
Ambig-DS-Target (51 paired tasks on DSBench) isolates prediction-target ambiguity; Ambig-DS-
Objective (61 paired tasks on MLE-bench) isolates evaluation-metric ambiguity. The intended framing
is used only for scoring; the desired behavior is not to recover it from an underdetermined observation,
but to recognize the underdetermination and ask. Each ambiguous variant is human-reviewed against
a four-item retention checklist (plausible alternatives, ambiguity preservation, decision relevance,
task preservation), with cross-family LLM-verifier audits confirming the labels. We analyze each
suite independently and do not pool results or compare effect magnitudes across suites.
Across five code-based agents, ambiguity induces unflagged misframing on 39–63% of Ambig-
DS-Target runs and silent failure on 16–62% of Ambig-DS-Objective runs — failures of framing
recognition rather than execution. An idealized one-shot clarification oracle recovers much of the
loss when invoked, but no model–prompt-policy combination we test achieves both calibrated asking
on ambiguous tasks and restraint on fully-specified ones: agents can use missing framing information
when offered but cannot reliably detect when to ask. Data-science agent evaluation should therefore
test framing recognition before pipeline execution.

Contributions. We (i) formalize task framing and isolate two of its core variables (prediction target
and evaluation objective); (ii) release Ambig-DS, two independently analyzed diagnostic suites (51
DSBench + 61 MLE-bench paired tasks) built via controlled prompt–data interventions verified by
humans and cross-family LLM verifiers; and (iii) quantify the resulting misframing and ask–act
miscalibration across five frontier agents as above.

2     Related Work

Data Science / ML Benchmarks. Recent benchmarks evaluate LLMs and agents on increasingly
realistic data-science and ML workflows. DS-1000 [Lai et al., 2023] and DA-Code [Huang et al.,
2024] focus on executable data-science code generation, while MLAgentBench [Huang et al., 2023],
DSBench [Jing et al., 2024], MLE-bench [Chan et al., 2024], DataSciBench [Zhang et al., 2025a],
MLGym [Nathani et al., 2025], and RE-Bench [Wijk et al., 2024] evaluate broader agentic workflows
involving data preparation, modeling, experimentation, and iterative improvement, and serve as
substrates for recent code-DS agent systems [Nam et al., 2025, Schmidgall et al., 2025, Stoisser et al.,
2025b]. These benchmarks make DS/ML-agent evaluation more realistic, but still assume a specified
task: the agent is told what to predict, optimize, and measure. Ambig-DS instead evaluates whether
agents can recognize and resolve underspecified task framings before executing a pipeline, motivated
by work showing that problem formulation choices are discretionary and consequential [Passi and
Barocas, 2019].

Ambiguity, Clarification, and Ask-Before-Act Agents. Recognizing underspecification1 has
been studied across a sequence of progressively more action-laden settings. In open-domain QA
and information seeking, prior work measures and trains for clarification of ambiguous questions,
information needs, and entity references [Min et al., 2020, Kuhn et al., 2022, Zhang et al., 2024c,
Lee et al., 2024, Park et al., 2025, Stoisser et al., 2025e]; in dialogue, work studies when and what to
ask, and how clarification reshapes downstream answers [Zhang and Choi, 2025, Zhang et al., 2024b,
Chen et al., 2024, Zhao et al., 2026, Luo et al., 2025]; for tool-using and planning agents, clarification
is studied over unclear instructions, missing arguments, and uncertain tool calls [Zhang et al., 2024d,
Mitra et al., 2026, Wang et al., 2025, Zhang et al., 2025b, Suri et al., 2025, Liu et al., 2024, Zhang
et al., 2024e, Stoisser et al., 2025d]. A common arc holds across these subfields: the community
first measures silent failure under ambiguity, then builds ask-before-act benchmarks, then trains for
    1We use underspecification in the task-framing sense: the prompt–data observation does not pin down a unique supervised-

learning problem. This is distinct from the model-level sense of D’Amour et al. [2022].


                                                             2
calibrated asking. For executable predictive data-science workflows — where the unit of ambiguity is
the supervised-learning framing rather than a question, a tool argument, or a plan step — the first
step is missing. Ambig-DS supplies it.

Executable and Data-Centric Underspecification. Closest to our setting are works where ambi-
guity affects executable artifacts. Code-generation and software-engineering work studies ambiguous
requirements, clarification-aware training, and interactive clarification before implementation [Mu
et al., 2023, Wu et al., 2025, Li et al., 2023, 2026], including on real software-engineering tickets [Vi-
jayvargiya et al., 2026], establishing ask–act evaluation as a mature setting for code and software
agents. Data-centric work studies ambiguity in tabular analysis and natural-language table queries [Li
et al., 2025, Gomm et al., 2025], while text-to-SQL work considers cases where one natural-language
query maps to multiple plausible SQL programs [Bhaskar et al., 2023, Stoisser et al., 2025c,a]. Across
these settings, ambiguity affects the surface form of the artifact while the underlying task type is fixed;
Ambig-DS targets ambiguity in the supervised-learning framing itself — what target to predict or
which objective to optimize — so that misframing yields a fully valid pipeline that nevertheless scores
poorly under the source evaluator. Our finding that an oracle-on-demand recovers much of the loss
while unaided agents silently commit places this in the selective-prediction and calibrated-abstention
tradition [Kamath et al., 2020, Kadavath et al., 2022, Zhang et al., 2024a]: the capability to defer is
present, but its calibration to the right inputs is not. Table 4 summarizes this positioning.


3   Problem Setup

A data-science agent receives an observation o = (p, d) consisting of a prompt p and data package
d. To act, it must commit to a framing: the discretionary choices that turn o into a well-posed
supervised-learning problem (target, objective, output form, prediction-time feature availability,
permissible external information, etc.). Many such choices exist; we focus on two representative
variables, θ = (T, M ), where T specifies the prediction target (which quantity to predict) and M
specifies the evaluation objective together with the output form it implies (e.g., calibrated probabilities
vs. hard labels, ranking vs. pointwise scores). We single these out because they are (i) directly tied
to the source-benchmark evaluator, so misframing is scorable without changing the scoring rule;
and (ii) controllable through minimal prompt–data edits that leave the rest of the task intact. Other
framing variables are held fixed in this benchmark and left to future work. We write θ⋆ for the
intended framing and θ̂ for the framing the agent commits to. Ambig-DS instantiates T on DSBench
(Ambig-DS-Target) and M on MLE-bench (Ambig-DS-Objective); each suite varies one component
while the other is fully specified by its source task, so we analyze suites independently and never
aggregate or compare effect magnitudes across them.
Let C(o) be the set of framings admitted by o under the verification protocol Π described in §4.3: Π
is a four-item human-and-LLM checklist (plausible alternatives, ambiguity preservation, decision
relevance, task preservation). The fully specified source observation o⋆ satisfies C(o⋆ ) = {θ⋆ }; a
constructed observation is ambiguous if |C(o)| > 1. Faced with such an observation, the agent must
either ask for clarification or commit to some θ̂ ∈ C(o). An unflagged misframing occurs when
the agent acts without clarification and commits to θ̂ ̸= θ⋆ , producing a coherent artifact under an
unintended framing. The label θ⋆ is a protocol convention inherited from the source task and used
purely for scoring: the agent should not recover θ⋆ from an underdetermined observation, but it
should recognize the underdetermination and ask before silently committing. A well-calibrated agent
satisfies: ask iff |C(o)| > 1; commit to θ⋆ when C(o) = {θ⋆ }. Ambig-DS evaluates deviations from
this rule via paired (Full, Ambig., Ask) conditions.

Two concrete instances. A target instance (bike-sharing-demand, DSBench): the original
prompt says “predict count” and the data exposes a count column; the ambiguous variant renames it
to val_1, adds a calibrated decoy val_2, and rewrites the prompt to “predict value”—both columns
are plausible, only val_1 is scored. An objective instance (aerial-cactus-identification,
MLE-bench): the original prompt evaluates submissions by ROC-AUC and the format is
id,has_cactus; the ambiguous variant keeps the data, target, and submission format identical
but replaces the metric sentence with “a standard evaluation procedure for this task,” so the agent
does not know whether to submit probabilities or hard labels. Full prompt diffs in Appendix D.


                                                    3
      1. Source Task             2. Screen               3. Generate             4. Verify                5. Package
         DSBench,               Executable &               Ambiguous            LLM + Human             Ambiguous + Full
         MLE-bench              Transformable               Variants               Review                 w/ Evaluator




          Target Ambiguity                                                         Retention Criteria
                                                Objective Ambiguity
          Prompt–data intervention:                                                ✓Plausible alternatives
                                                Prompt-only intervention:
          • Remove target cues in prompt                                           ✓Ambiguity preserved
                                                • Remove explicit metric refs
          • Add plausible decoy target                                             ✓Decision-relevant ambiguity
                                                • Keep data/submission fixed
          • Rename target (val_1/val_2)                                            ✓Original solvability preserved


Figure 1: Ambig-DS construction pipeline. Tasks are transformed through two pathways: target
ambiguity (manipulating prompt and data) and objective ambiguity (manipulating the prompt only).
Final variants are filtered through human and LLM verification to ensure the ambiguity is decision-
relevant and the underlying task is preserved.


4     Benchmark Construction

We construct Ambig-DS by converting fully specified Kaggle-style predictive tasks into paired
packages: the original task and an ambiguous variant in which the prompt–data observation no longer
uniquely determines the intended framing. The ambiguous variant preserves the original evaluator,
so performance changes reflect task-framing ambiguity rather than a changed scoring rule. The
two suites are built on disjoint source benchmarks chosen for the framing variable they isolate, and
we describe their construction independently below; Section 4.3 covers the shared verification and
filtering procedure, and Section 4.4 specifies the clarification oracle that ships with each released task
and is invoked under the Ask evaluation condition (§5). The five-stage construction pipeline is shown
in Figure 1; Table 5 summarizes the retained tasks. Screening retains DSBench tasks with a single
clean target column and MLE-bench tasks whose data package fits the harness storage limit (50 GB).
Prompts are in G

4.1   Ambig-DS-Target Construction (DSBench)

We build the target-ambiguity suite on DSBench because its tabular modeling tasks typically expose
a single explicit target column, enabling controlled target interventions while the evaluator is held
fixed. We use coordinated prompt–data interventions: we rename the true target column to either
val_1 or val_2, and add a second candidate target with the other name. The true-target ordering
is randomized: in the final target set, val_1 is correct in 31 cases and val_2 in 20. The sample
submission column headers are replaced with a generic name, e.g., id,prediction, and the test
split contains neither candidate target.
The added target is designed to be a plausible alternative, not an obvious distractor. We construct
the decoy in two steps. First, we build a vector of scores from a small subset of visible features that
are weakly correlated with the true target (in our implementation the bottom ∼ 70% of features by
|ρSpearman (·, y)|, clamped to [4, 40]). Then we sort training rows by this score vector and assign
true-target values in the same sorted order, so the decoy has the same value distribution as the true
target but is driven by a different combination of features. To target equal feature-predictability, we
add per-task calibrated label noise (label swapping for classification, Gaussian noise injected into the
rank-mapped decoy followed by a re-rank-map onto sort(y) for regression) and binary-search the
noise level η to drive the 3-fold HistGradientBoosting score of the decoy toward the true target within
a target tolerance (AUC for binary classification, accuracy for multiclass, R2 for regression); 29 of
51 retained tasks meet a 0.02 gap, 40 meet 0.05, and 44 meet 0.10. The remaining tasks retain the
closest candidate satisfying the marginal and correlation filters. Construction details and validation
diagnostics — exact marginal matches, low target–decoy correlations, small CV-signal gaps, and
near-chance inferability under marginal, CV, and LLM schema heuristics — are in Appendix C.2.
We then edit the prompt to remove target-identifying language while preserving the task using Claude
Opus 4.7 (worked example: §3 and Appendix D.2). Since both candidate targets appear in training,
are absent from the test split, and have plausible marginals and feature signal, the full prompt–data
observation does not identify which candidate target is intended.


                                                                4
4.2   Ambig-DS-Objective Construction (MLE-bench)

We build the objective-ambiguity suite on MLE-bench because its Kaggle competitions often make
the metric central to model selection, thresholding, and submission formatting. We use prompt-only
interventions: we keep the data package, target definition, submission format, and evaluator fixed, but
remove explicit metric references from the prompt using Claude Opus 4.7. Metric-specific language
is replaced with generic performance language (worked example: §3 and Appendix D.1); the target
remains specified while the optimization objective is underspecified.
The metric-ambiguity set includes both higher-is-better and lower-is-better objectives: 27 and 12
tasks, respectively. Metrics include log loss, ROC-AUC variants, word-level Jaccard, accuracy, RM-
SE/RMSLE, MAE, MAP@K, label-weighted label-ranking average precision, Pearson correlation,
Levenshtein rate, and custom geometric distance. This diversity makes metric omission decision-
relevant: agents may need to choose hard labels versus probabilities, infer the optimization direction,
or account for metric-specific quirks such as top-K ranking, clipping, column-wise averaging, or
custom aggregation. See Appendix D.1 for a worked out example.

4.3   Verification and Filtering

The same verification and filtering procedure is applied to both suites. Each candidate passes LLM
verification and human review using the same checklist:

      1. Plausible alternatives: the edited task admits at least two reasonable candidate framings.
      2. Ambiguity preservation: these alternatives remain plausible after considering both the
         edited prompt and edited data package. This check catches failed edits where a cue removed
         from one part of the task package (prompt or data) is still revealed elsewhere.
      3. Decision relevance: resolving the ambiguity changes a task-level choice a competent solver
         should make, such as the target, output value type, optimization criterion, thresholding, or
         submission semantics.
      4. Task preservation: the edit removes only information needed to induce the ambiguity;
         unrelated task information is preserved.

To audit possible construction-model bias, we re-run the verification checklist with non-Claude
verifiers and compare their decisions against the final human-reviewed labels; agreement is broadly
similar across model families (Appendix C.3). This audit tests whether candidate variants that enter
the filtering stage satisfy the retention checklist across model families; it does not show that a different
generator model would propose the same distribution of candidate variants.

4.4   Clarification Oracle

Beyond the construction protocol above, each released task ships with a clarification oracle that defines
a scoped, truthful channel through which the missing framing variable can be elicited; agents invoke it
under the Ask evaluation condition (§5). Before modeling, the agent may inspect and explore the data
package but cannot fit or evaluate models; it then writes one self-contained question of ≤ 50 words,
or NONE, and stops. Claude Haiku 4.6 answers under a restricted answer-only protocol. For target
ambiguity, the oracle answers only the literal question and reveals the target only if explicitly asked;
it may not reveal test statistics, cross-validation diagnostics, construction internals, code, or modeling
advice. For objective ambiguity, the oracle is restricted to metric, scoring, and submission-format
information (metric name, direction, required submission value type, metric quirks). Out-of-scope
requests receive a fixed refusal. The oracle is not a simulation of stakeholder interaction; it is a causal
probe that asks whether the agent can elicit the missing framing information when a truthful, scoped
channel is available, isolating framing recognition from realistic-user variability. Two idealizations
cut in opposite directions: one-shot understates what richer multi-turn clarification could recover,
while truthful, scoped, always-available answers overstate what noisy real stakeholders would yield.
Ask is therefore a causal diagnostic for whether the missing framing information suffices when
delivered perfectly, not a deployment estimate. Oracle-family effects (Claude Haiku 4.6) cannot be
ruled out; the answer-only protocol restricted to manifest fields mitigates this.


                                                     5
5     Experiments

5.1   Experimental Setup

Agent framework and models. We evaluate code-based agents in the OpenCode framework
[AnomalyCo, 2026], which supports iterative code generation, execution, debugging, and artifact
submission over a prompt–data package. We evaluate efficient models (Gemini 3 Flash, GPT-
5.4 Nano, Claude Haiku 4.5) to frontier-class models (Gemini 3.1 Pro, GPT-5.4), to characterize how
ambiguity sensitivity scales with frontier capability. All models are evaluated with the same tool
access, execution environment, and per-suite wall-clock budget (2h on Ambig-DS-Target, 24h on
Ambig-DS-Objective), the oracle round-trip is not counted towards the budget. Prompts are in G.

Evaluation conditions. Each task is evaluated under three conditions. Full is the original fully
specified task, with the target and evaluation objective explicit. Ambig. is the ambiguous variant with
no clarification oracle available; the agent is not invited to ask, but is also not prevented from flagging
the underdetermination or abstaining. An alternative-framing submission therefore reflects a silent
unilateral commitment under ambiguity. Ask is the ambiguous variant with the clarification oracle
described in Section 4.4: before modeling, the agent may ask exactly one self-contained question
under 50 words, or output NONE, and then stops until the oracle answer is returned.

Task performance. Task success is scored with the original source benchmark evaluator (DSBench
score for target ambiguity; MLE-bench competition score for objective ambiguity), normalized
to [0, 1]. Let Sfull , Sambig , and Sask denote the per-task normalized scores; we define ∆ambig =
Sambig − Sfull and ∆ask = Sask − Sambig , macro-averaged across tasks. Negative ∆ambig indicates
degradation; positive ∆ask indicates recovery. Invalid and Timeout runs score 0 and remain in the
denominator (51 Target / 61 Objective tasks per cell). We report one-sided paired Wilcoxon signed-
rank tests (Full > Ambig.; Ask > Ambig.) and paired bootstrap 95% CIs (Appendices C.8, C.9). All
comparisons are within-task and matched across conditions.

Ask behavior. We report two ask rates in the ask-enabled setting: Ask on Ambig. (fraction of
ambiguous tasks where the agent asks; asking is the desired behavior) and Ask on Full (fraction
of fully specified tasks where the agent asks despite the framing being specified). An ask is any
non-NONE question written to _question.txt; out-of-scope questions count as asks (and receive the
fixed refusal), and are sub-classified in Tables 14–15. Per-cell denominators are reported in Table 13.

Framing diagnostics. We separate task-framing failures from generic execution failures by first
checking whether the run produced a parseable submission accepted by the evaluator. For target
ambiguity, valid submissions are labeled by whether they optimize the intended or alternative target.
For objective ambiguity, five LLM-judge calls with majority vote classify the code, logs, response,
and submission as intended-objective, alternative-objective, degenerate, or invalid/no-score; a human
verifies the classification. Only valid alternative-framing runs are counted as unflagged misframings.
Inter-judge agreement, human override rates, and a cross-family judge/oracle robustness check on
Claude-evaluated runs are reported in Appendix C.4; headline conclusions are unchanged under
either judge or oracle family.

5.2   Results: Ambig-DS-Target (DSBench)

Frontier agents silently commit to a wrong target. Even frontier backbones (Gemini 3.1 Pro, GPT-
5.4) submit a plausible alternative target on 39–63% of ambiguous DSBench runs without flagging the
underdetermination (Table 2); the smaller backbones misframe at 43–59%. These valid alternative-
target submissions are unflagged misframings (Section 3). Appendix F (bike-sharing-demand)
shows an agent inventing a plausible but unsupported target composition rather than asking for
clarification, and a trace/answer recognition audit (Appendix C.5) shows that user-overridable
flagging in the final answer never exceeds 4% even when traces acknowledge the ambiguity, so
the silent-commitment characterization holds at the answer-facing level. Conditional on category,
intended runs score near Full and alternative-target runs collapse (Appendix C.6).


                                                    6
      Axis        Model                Performance ↑               Change                  Wilcoxon p-value
                                     Full Ambig. Ask            ∆ambig ↓ ∆ask ↑ Full > Ambig. Ask > Ambig.
      Objective   Gemini 3 Flash     0.31   0.22     0.31       −0.09     +0.09      <0.001∗∗∗        0.002∗∗
      Objective   GPT-5.4 Nano       0.11   0.05     0.10       −0.06     +0.05       0.004∗∗         0.004∗∗
      Objective   Claude Haiku 4.5   0.27   0.23     0.26       −0.04     +0.03       0.012∗          0.010∗
      Objective   Gemini 3.1 Pro     0.27   0.23     0.27       −0.04     +0.04       0.011∗          0.012∗
      Objective   GPT-5.4            0.26   0.22     0.26       −0.04     +0.04       0.004∗∗         0.021∗
      Target      Gemini 3 Flash     0.63   0.44     0.61       −0.19     +0.17       0.018∗          0.021∗
      Target      GPT-5.4 Nano       0.49   0.39     0.45       −0.10     +0.06       0.002∗∗         0.020∗
      Target      Claude Haiku 4.5   0.56   0.32     0.52       −0.24     +0.20      <0.001∗∗∗        0.002∗∗
      Target      Gemini 3.1 Pro     0.64   0.49     0.60       −0.15     +0.11      <0.001∗∗∗       <0.001∗∗∗
      Target      GPT-5.4            0.61   0.32     0.52       −0.29     +0.20      <0.001∗∗∗       <0.001∗∗∗

Table 1: Main results. Target ambiguity on DSBench, objective ambiguity on MLE-bench. Scores
are normalized to [0, 1]. We report per-condition performance, paired changes (∆ambig , ∆ask ), and
one-sided Wilcoxon tests (Full > Ambig.; Ask > Ambig.). Bootstrap 95% CIs are in Table 12.


      Model                Intended Target ↑       Alternative Target ↓            Invalid ↓        Timeout ↓
                           Ambig.       Ask        Ambig.           Ask           Ambig.    Ask    Ambig.     Ask
      Gemini 3 Flash        43%         96%         43%              2%            6%        0%      8%       2%
      GPT-5.4 Nano          47%         78%         47%             18%            4%        2%      2%       2%
      Claude Haiku 4.5      26%         88%         59%              4%            8%        4%      8%       4%
      Gemini 3.1 Pro        55%         96%         39%              4%            4%        0%      2%       0%
      GPT-5.4               27%         71%         63%             24%            6%        2%      4%       4%

Table 2: Target-framing diagnostics. Each run is classified as optimizing the intended target, an
alternative plausible target, or yielding no valid score. Under Ambig. the agent is not invited to ask,
so alternative-target submissions are unilateral commitments to an unintended target without acknowl-
edging the underdetermination—i.e., unflagged misframings. Invalid (missing/unparseable/rejected)
and Timeout (budget exhausted) are reported separately and not counted as misframings.


This translates to score loss. On Target rows of Table 1, ∆ambig ranges from −0.10 to −0.29;
all five bootstrap CIs exclude zero (Table 12; tightest GPT-5.4 Nano, [−0.18, −0.02]); all paired
Wilcoxon tests for Full > Ambig. are significant.


5.3   Results: Ambig-DS-Objective (MLE-bench)

Ambiguity degrades performance. On Ambig-DS-Objective, ∆ambig ranges from −0.04 to −0.09
(15–35% of Full); all five bootstrap CIs exclude zero (Table 12; tightest GPT-5.4, [−0.06, −0.02]);
all paired Wilcoxon tests for Full > Ambig. are significant.


Silent failures take two forms: misframing and abdication. Table 3 shows that the dominant
Ambiguous-condition failures split between two modes that share a silent-failure signature. Unflagged
misframing (Alternative Obj.) is a substantive model optimized for a plausible but unintended
objective. Unflagged abdication (Degenerate) is a non-committal submission such as a copied
baseline or constant prediction. Both produce valid, scoreable artifacts; neither acknowledges
the underdetermination or asks for clarification; both are quietly suboptimal under the intended
objective. Combined silent failure runs 16–62% under Ambig. across all backbones (frontier: 46%
Gemini 3.1 Pro, 19% GPT-5.4), splitting into 5–18% misframing and 8–49% abdication. Under Ask,
Alternative Obj. drops to ≤ 4% everywhere, but Degenerate persists for weaker backbones — Ask
kills misframing, not abdication. Ask also reduces Invalid submissions, plausibly because some
format mismatches resolve once the oracle reveals the required submission value type. Appendix F
(random-acts-of-pizza) shows an agent treating an AUC probability-ranking task as hard binary
classification when the metric is omitted. Same conditional pattern holds, with degenerate runs near
zero (Appendix C.6).


                                                            7
      Model              Intended Obj. ↑   Alternative Obj. ↓   Degenerate ↓    Invalid ↓      Timeout ↓
                         Ambig.    Ask     Ambig.     Ask       Ambig.   Ask   Ambig.   Ask   Ambig.   Ask
      Gemini 3 Flash      75%      84%      5%         0%        11%     11%    7%      2%     2%      3%
      GPT-5.4 Nano        38%      54%      13%        0%        49%     46%    0%      0%     0%      0%
      Claude Haiku 4.5    54%      95%      18%        0%        21%      5%    5%      0%     2%      0%
      Gemini 3.1 Pro      51%      59%      13%        3%        33%     33%    2%      3%     2%      2%
      GPT-5.4             72%      79%      11%        0%         8%     11%    5%      7%     4%      4%

Table 3: Objective-framing diagnostics. Majority vote over five LLM-judge calls on each run’s
trajectory and submission. Intended Obj.: substantive model aligned with the source metric. Alterna-
tive Obj.: substantive model optimized for a plausible but unintended objective. Degenerate: no real
modeling attempt (e.g., copied baseline, constants). Invalid: missing/unparseable; Timeout: budget
exhausted. Invalid and Timeout are split to surface wall-clock confounds.




Figure 2: Ask-policy sensitivity. Each point is one (model, policy) on one suite. Vertical axis:
clarification recall on ambiguous tasks (↑). Horizontal axis: unnecessary clarification on fully
specified tasks (↓). Perfect calibration is the top-left ⋆. Permissive (filled circle) yields high recall but
high false positives; conservative (open square) reduces over-asking but suppresses legitimate asking,
especially on Ambig-DS-Objective. Numerical values are in Table 13.


5.4   Cross-Suite Observations

The degradation-under-Ambig. and recovery-under-Ask pattern holds in both suites and is not
specific to Claude-family evaluated agents: restricting to the four non-Claude backbones in Table 1
(Gemini 3 Flash, Gemini 3.1 Pro, GPT-5.4 Nano, GPT-5.4) preserves the qualitative pattern within
each suite — every non-Claude row shows ∆ambig < 0 and ∆ask > 0 with all paired Wilcoxon
tests significant at p < 0.05. To rule out same-family inflation in the Ask condition, we re-run
Claude Haiku 4.5 Ask with a GPT-5.4 oracle: ∆ask shifts +0.20 → +0.18 on Target, unchanged on
Objective. Swapping the Objective judge from Claude to GPT shifts per-cell misframing by ≤ 4pp
(κ=0.74); suggesti g recovery is not an oracle- or judge-family artifact (Appendices C.3, C.4).

Agents can use clarification when obtained, but cannot reliably detect when to ask. Ap-
pendix E.2 reports the full ask–act calibration analysis. Calibration varies substantially across models
and policies within each suite (Figure 2; numerical values in Table 13): on Ambig-DS-Target, some
model–policy combinations approach good calibration (e.g., Gemini 3.1 Pro under the conservative
policy asks on 94% of ambiguous tasks and 0% of fully specified ones), while on Ambig-DS-
Objective most agents collapse under the conservative policy (Claude Haiku 4.5 asks on only 5% of
ambiguous metric tasks; GPT-5.4 Nano and GPT-5.4 ask on 0%). Within each suite, the permissive
policy yields high recall on ambiguous tasks at the cost of high false positives on fully specified ones,
while the conservative policy reduces over-asking but suppresses legitimate asking in turn.
The diagnostics reveal what goes wrong at each end. Over-asking is rarely a legitimate response to
missing task information: on fully specified tasks under the permissive policy, unnecessary questions
are dominated by style preferences, restatements of information already present in the prompt, and
out-of-scope requests for modeling guidance — e.g., 88% of Claude Haiku 4.5’s asks on Target are
style-preference questions and 85% of Gemini 3 Flash’s asks on Objective are out-of-scope requests
(Table 14). Under-asking manifests not as asking the wrong question but as silently committing to a
default framing without acknowledging the ambiguity, particularly in Ambig-DS-Objective where
agents proceed without the metric rather than flagging its absence — under the conservative policy,


                                                         8
GPT-5.4 and GPT-5.4 Nano silently default on 100% of ambiguous metric runs and Claude Haiku 4.5
on 97%, while 0–8% of asks ever target the wrong topic (Table 15). Permissive and conservative
bracket the practical operating range; observing that both yield miscalibration on at least one suite
for every model–policy pair we tested2 is consistent with the qualitative claim that the failure is the
absence of reliable internal detection, which no prompt policy in our study substitutes for.
To assess whether asking on ambiguous tasks reflects genuine framing recognition, we examine
recovery under the clarification oracle. When the missing framing variable is elicited and incorporated,
much of the ambiguity-induced degradation is recoverable within each suite, with ∆ask reaching
+0.20 on Ambig-DS-Target and +0.09 on Ambig-DS-Objective (Table 1); Ask essentially closes
the Ambig.–Full gap on Objective but leaves a residual gap on Target. Agents have the capacity to
integrate framing information when provided perfectly; whether they can extract it from realistic
stakeholder interaction is untested by this protocol. Ask does not fully recover Full for most model–
suite pairs, so residual execution failures persist even after framing is resolved.

6    Discussion and Limitations
Ambig-DS isolates a failure mode that standard data-science benchmarks largely hide. In fully
specified settings, a valid submission is often taken as evidence that the agent understood the task.
Under task-framing ambiguity, this inference breaks down: an agent can produce a coherent artifact
while committing to a plausible but unintended target or objective. This separates pipeline-execution
competence from task-framing competence.
The two suites yield distinct silent-failure signatures. Ambig-DS-Target produces discrete wrong-
target misframings; Ambig-DS-Objective splits between substantive misframings (commitment
to a plausible alternative objective) and abdications (retreat to a degenerate baseline or constant
submission). Both are unflagged commitments under ambiguity rather than execution failures.
Within each suite, the clarification oracle recovers much of the lost performance, indicating that
missing framing information — not pipeline execution — drives the degradation. The non-trivial
finding is not that recovery occurs but that agents cannot reliably detect when to invoke clarification.
Ambig-DS yields actionable signals for three audiences. Users should specify framing variables
(target, metric, output type, submission semantics) explicitly: omitting them produces reliable and
often large performance drops even from capable agents. Builders should treat ask–act calibration as
a concrete post-training or prompt-engineering target, since prompt wording shifts the operating point
but does not yield robust sensitivity to decision-relevant ambiguity. Benchmark designers should pair
fully specified tasks with diagnostic ambiguous variants: pipeline-execution scores on fully specified
tasks overestimate competence when framing is not guaranteed.
Limitations. Ambig-DS is a controlled diagnostic suite, not a census. We construct minimal
interventions on existing benchmark tasks while preserving the original evaluator, and study only
two framing variables (T , M ); other framing variables (information boundaries, data leakage,
temporal assumptions, prediction-time feature availability, permissible external information) and
richer naturalistic ambiguity are kept for future work. Axis is confounded with source benchmark by
design: target ambiguity is instantiated on DSBench (clean tabular targets), objective ambiguity on
MLE-bench (metric-sensitive competitions), so effect-size differences across suites are not a causal
comparison and we interpret each suite independently. Construction and oracle are model-assisted
(Claude Opus generation/verification, Claude Haiku oracle); we mitigate via cross-family verifier
audit (App. C.3), cross-family judge/oracle robustness (App. C.4), human review, and the non-Claude
agent subset, but residual generation- and oracle-family effects cannot be fully ruled out. Finally, θ⋆
is a protocol scoring convention rather than the unique correct reading; the Ask oracle is intentionally
idealized and should be read as an upper bound on recoverable performance; the dataset is modest in
size; and because the Ambig. condition has no clarification channel, ∆ambig does not fully separate
non-recognition from commitment-under-recognized-ambiguity, a confound bounded at the trace
level by the recognition audit (Appendix C.5). Together these mean Ambig-DS estimates should be
read as diagnostic evidence of failure modes under verified ambiguity rather than as prevalence over
the space of all data-science tasks; full discussion in Appendix A.
   2 The calibration claim is over the 5 models × 2 policies × 2 suites = 20 cells we evaluate; the released task packages,

evaluators, oracle protocol, and judge prompts are public, so extending this audit to additional (in particular open-weights)
backbones requires only re-running the harness (App. A).


                                                             9
References

AnomalyCo. OpenCode. https://github.com/anomalyco/opencode, 2026. GitHub repository,
  accessed 2 May 2026.
Adithya Bhaskar, Tushar Tomar, Ashutosh Sathe, and Sunita Sarawagi. Benchmarking and improving
  text-to-sql generation under ambiguity. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical
  Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 7053–7074, 2023.
Jun Shern Chan, Neil Chowdhury, Oliver Jaffe, James Aung, Dane Sherburn, Evan Mays, Giulio
  Starace, Kevin Liu, Leon Maksin, Tejal Patwardhan, et al. Mle-bench: Evaluating machine learning
  agents on machine learning engineering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.07095, 2024.
Maximillian Chen, Ruoxi Sun, Tomas Pfister, and Sercan Ö Arık. Learning to clarify: Multi-turn
 conversations with action-based contrastive self-training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.00222, 2024.
Alexander D’Amour, Katherine Heller, Dan Moldovan, Ben Adlam, Babak Alipanahi, Alex Beutel,
  Christina Chen, Jonathan Deaton, Jacob Eisenstein, Matthew D Hoffman, et al. Underspecification
  presents challenges for credibility in modern machine learning. Journal of Machine Learning
  Research, 23(226):1–61, 2022.
Daniel Gomm, Cornelius Wolff, and Madelon Hulsebos. Are we asking the right questions? on
  ambiguity in natural language queries for tabular data analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.04584,
  2025.
Qian Huang, Jian Vora, Percy Liang, and Jure Leskovec. Mlagentbench: Evaluating language agents
  on machine learning experimentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.03302, 2023.
Yiming Huang, Jianwen Luo, Yan Yu, Yitong Zhang, Fangyu Lei, Yifan Wei, Shizhu He, Lifu
  Huang, Xiao Liu, Jun Zhao, et al. Da-code: Agent data science code generation benchmark for
  large language models. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
  Language Processing, pages 13487–13521, 2024.
Liqiang Jing, Zhehui Huang, Xiaoyang Wang, Wenlin Yao, Wenhao Yu, Kaixin Ma, Hongming
  Zhang, Xinya Du, and Dong Yu. Dsbench: How far are data science agents from becoming data
  science experts? arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.07703, 2024.
Saurav Kadavath, Tom Conerly, Amanda Askell, Tom Henighan, Dawn Drain, Ethan Perez, Nicholas
  Schiefer, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Nova DasSarma, Eli Tran-Johnson, et al. Language models (mostly)
  know what they know. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.05221, 2022.
Amita Kamath, Robin Jia, and Percy Liang. Selective question answering under domain shift. In
 Proceedings of the 58th annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics, pages
 5684–5696, 2020.
Lorenz Kuhn, Yarin Gal, and Sebastian Farquhar. Clam: Selective clarification for ambiguous
  questions with generative language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.07769, 2022.
Yuhang Lai, Chengxi Li, Yiming Wang, Tianyi Zhang, Ruiqi Zhong, Luke Zettlemoyer, Wen-tau Yih,
  Daniel Fried, Sida Wang, and Tao Yu. Ds-1000: A natural and reliable benchmark for data science
  code generation. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 18319–18345. PMLR,
  2023.
Yoonsang Lee, Xi Ye, and Eunsol Choi. Ambigdocs: Reasoning across documents on different
  entities under the same name. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.12447, 2024.
Haau-Sing Xiaocheng Li, Mohsen Mesgar, André FT Martins, and Iryna Gurevych. Python code
  generation by asking clarification questions. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the
 Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 14287–14306, 2023.
Jialin Li, Yuan Wu, and Yi Chang. Clareval: A benchmark for evaluating clarification skills of code
   agents under ambiguous instructions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.00187, 2026.


                                                10
Jinyang Li, Nan Huo, Yan Gao, Jiayi Shi, Yingxiu Zhao, Ge Qu, Bowen Qin, Yurong Wu, Xiaodong
   Li, Chenhao Ma, et al. Are large language models ready for multi-turn tabular data analysis? In
   Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning, 2025.

Hao Liu, Zi-Yi Dou, Yixin Wang, Nanyun Peng, and Yisong Yue. Uncertainty calibration for tool-
  using language agents. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP
  2024, pages 16781–16805, 2024.

Sichun Luo, Yi Huang, Mukai Li, Shichang Meng, Fengyuan Liu, Zefa Hu, Junlan Feng, and Qi Liu.
  Clarifymt-bench: Benchmarking and improving multi-turn clarification for conversational large
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.21120, 2025.

Sewon Min, Julian Michael, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Ambigqa: Answering
  ambiguous open-domain questions. In Proceedings of the 2020 conference on empirical methods
  in natural language processing (EMNLP), pages 5783–5797, 2020.

Kushan Mitra, Dan Zhang, Hannah Kim, and Estevam Hruschka. Recap: Rewriting conversations
  for intent understanding in agentic planning. In Findings of the Association for Computational
 Linguistics: EACL 2026, pages 2015–2033, 2026.

Fangwen Mu, Lin Shi, Song Wang, Zhuohao Yu, Binquan Zhang, Chenxue Wang, Shichao Liu, and
  Qing Wang. Clarifygpt: Empowering llm-based code generation with intention clarification. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2310.10996, 2023.

Jaehyun Nam, Jinsung Yoon, Jiefeng Chen, Jinwoo Shin, Sercan Ö Arık, and Tomas Pfister. Mle-
  star: Machine learning engineering agent via search and targeted refinement. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2506.15692, 2025.

Deepak Nathani, Lovish Madaan, Nicholas Roberts, Nikolay Bashlykov, Ajay Menon, Vincent Moens,
  Amar Budhiraja, Despoina Magka, Vladislav Vorotilov, Gaurav Chaurasia, et al. Mlgym: A new
  framework and benchmark for advancing ai research agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.14499,
  2025.

Jeonghyun Park, Ingeol Baek, Seunghyun Yoon, Haeun Jang, Aparna Garimella, Akriti Jain, Nedim
  Lipka, and Hwanhee Lee. Mirage: Multi-hop reasoning with ambiguity evaluation for illusory
  questions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.22750, 2025.

Samir Passi and Solon Barocas. Problem formulation and fairness. In Proceedings of the conference
  on fairness, accountability, and transparency, pages 39–48, 2019.

Samuel Schmidgall, Yusheng Su, Ze Wang, Ximeng Sun, Jialian Wu, Xiaodong Yu, Jiang Liu,
  Michael Moor, Zicheng Liu, and Emad Barsoum. Agent laboratory: Using llm agents as research
  assistants. Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2025, pages
  5977–6043, 2025.

Josefa Lia Stoisser, Marc Boubnovski Martell, and Julien Fauqueur. Sparks of tabular reasoning
  via text2sql reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 4th Table Representation Learning
  Workshop, pages 229–240, 2025a.

Josefa Lia Stoisser, Marc Boubnovski Martell, Kaspar MÃĪrtens, Lawrence Phillips, Stephen Michael
  Town, Rory Donovan-Maiye, and Julien Fauqueur. Query, don’t train: Privacy-preserving tabular
  prediction from ehr data via sql queries. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.21801, 2025b.

Josefa Lia Stoisser, Marc Boubnovski Martell, Lawrence Phillips, Casper Hansen, and Julien
  Fauqueur. Struct-llm: Unifying tabular and graph reasoning with reinforcement learning for
  semantic parsing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.21575, 2025c.

Josefa Lia Stoisser, Marc Boubnovski Martell, Lawrence Phillips, Gianluca Mazzoni, Lea Mørch
  Harder, Philip Torr, Jesper Ferkinghoff-Borg, Kaspar Martens, and Julien Fauqueur. Towards
  agents that know when they don’t know: Uncertainty as a control signal for structured reasoning.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.02401, 2025d.


                                               11
Josefa Lia Stoisser, Lawrence Phillips, Aditya Misra, Tom A Lamb, Philip Torr, Marc Boubnovski
  Martell, Julien Fauqueur, and Kaspar MÃĪrtens. Towards label-free biological reasoning synthetic
  dataset creation via uncertainty filtering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.05871, 2025e.

Manan Suri, Puneet Mathur, Nedim Lipka, Franck Dernoncourt, Ryan A Rossi, and Dinesh Manocha.
 Structured uncertainty guided clarification for llm agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.08798, 2025.

Sanidhya Vijayvargiya, Xuhui Zhou, Akhila Yerukola, Maarten Sap, and Graham Neubig. Ambig-
  swe: Interactive agents to overcome underspecificity in software engineering. In The Fourteenth
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2026.

Wenxuan Wang, Shi Juluan, Zixuan Ling, Yuk-Kit Chan, Chaozheng Wang, Cheryl Lee, Youliang
 Yuan, Jen-tse Huang, Wenxiang Jiao, and Michael R Lyu. Learning to ask: When llm agents meet
 unclear instruction. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
 Language Processing, pages 21784–21795, 2025.

Hjalmar Wijk, Tao Lin, Joel Becker, Sami Jawhar, Neev Parikh, Thomas Broadley, Lawrence Chan,
  Michael Chen, Josh Clymer, Jai Dhyani, et al. Re-bench: Evaluating frontier ai r&d capabilities of
  language model agents against human experts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.15114, 2024.

Jie JW Wu, Manav Chaudhary, Davit Abrahamyan, Arhaan Khaku, Anjiang Wei, and Fatemeh H
   Fard. Clarifycoder: Clarification-aware fine-tuning for programmatic problem solving. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2504.16331v1, 2025.

Dan Zhang, Sining Zhoubian, Min Cai, Fengzu Li, Lekang Yang, Wei Wang, Tianjiao Dong, Ziniu
  Hu, Jie Tang, and Yisong Yue. Datascibench: An llm agent benchmark for data science. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2502.13897, 2025a.

Hanning Zhang, Shizhe Diao, Yong Lin, Yi Fung, Qing Lian, Xingyao Wang, Yangyi Chen, Heng Ji,
  and Tong Zhang. R-tuning: Instructing large language models to say ‘i don’t know’. In Proceedings
  of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 7113–7139, 2024a.

Michael JQ Zhang and Eunsol Choi. Clarify when necessary: Resolving ambiguity through interaction
 with lms. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2025, pages
 5526–5543, 2025.

Michael JQ Zhang, W Bradley Knox, and Eunsol Choi. Modeling future conversation turns to teach
 llms to ask clarifying questions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.13788, 2024b.

Tong Zhang, Peixin Qin, Yang Deng, Chen Huang, Wenqiang Lei, Junhong Liu, Dingnan Jin, Hongru
  Liang, and Tat-Seng Chua. Clamber: A benchmark of identifying and clarifying ambiguous
  information needs in large language models. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 10746–10766, 2024c.

Xuan Zhang, Yang Deng, Zifeng Ren, See Kiong Ng, and Tat-Seng Chua. Ask-before-plan: Proactive
  language agents for real-world planning. In Findings of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics: EMNLP 2024, pages 10836–10863, 2024d.

Xuan Zhang, Yongliang Shen, Zhe Zheng, Linjuan Wu, Wenqi Zhang, Yuchen Yan, Qiuying Peng,
 Jun Wang, and Weiming Lu. Asktoact: Enhancing llms tool use via self-correcting clarification.
  In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
  pages 13495–13522, 2025b.

Yuxiang Zhang, Jing Chen, Junjie Wang, Yaxin Liu, Cheng Yang, Chufan Shi, Xinyu Zhu, Zihao Lin,
  Hanwen Wan, Yujiu Yang, et al. Toolbehonest: A multi-level hallucination diagnostic benchmark
  for tool-augmented large language models. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical
  Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 11388–11422, 2024e.

Jiale Zhao, Ke Fang, and Lu Cheng. When and what to ask: Askbench and rubric-guided rlvr for llm
   clarification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.11199, 2026.


                                                12
A    Extended Limitations
This appendix expands the main-body Limitations into per-item paragraphs. The main paper retains
the four-paragraph compressed version; reviewers seeking a granular treatment of any individual
concern should consult the matching paragraph below.

Naturalistic ambiguity not captured. Ambig-DS uses minimal, controlled prompt–data inter-
ventions on existing benchmark tasks so that performance changes can be attributed causally to
task-framing ambiguity. This isolation is deliberate but does not capture the full messiness of
naturally occurring data-science ambiguity, where prompts, legacy datasets, stakeholder context,
organizational constraints, and multiple ambiguity types interact. Ambig-DS measures whether
agents recognize and act on a single, controlled, decision-relevant ambiguity in an otherwise clean
task; it does not measure how agents would behave in fully naturalistic underspecified workflows.

Scope of framing variables (T , M ). Ambig-DS deliberately studies only two framing variables:
the prediction target T , and the evaluation objective M . We chose these because they are tied directly
to the source-benchmark evaluator (so misframing is scorable without changing the scoring rule) and
controllable through minimal prompt–data edits. Other framing variables are also important but are
held fixed in this benchmark: information-boundary ambiguity, data leakage, temporal assumptions,
prediction-time feature availability, and permissible use of external information. Extending the
diagnostic protocol to these axes is future work.

Intended framing as a protocol scoring convention. The label θ⋆ inherited from the source task
is a protocol convention used for scoring (§3), not the unique correct reading of the ambiguous
observation. The diagnostic claim is not that the agent should recover θ⋆ from an underdetermined
observation, but that it should recognize the underdetermination and ask before silently committing.
The reported numbers therefore measure unflagged commitment under ambiguity against a fixed
scoring convention; they do not measure whether the agent’s chosen alternative framing is itself
reasonable in absolute terms.

Idealized clarification oracle. Beyond the construction protocol above, each released task ships
with a clarification oracle that defines a scoped, truthful channel through which the missing framing
variable can be elicited; agents invoke it under the Ask evaluation condition (§5). Before modeling,
the agent may inspect and explore the data package but cannot fit or evaluate models; it then writes
one self-contained question of ≤ 50 words, or NONE, and stops. Claude Haiku 4.6 answers under a
restricted answer-only protocol. For target ambiguity, the oracle answers only the literal question and
reveals the target only if explicitly asked; it may not reveal test statistics, cross-validation diagnostics,
construction internals, code, or modeling advice. For objective ambiguity, the oracle is restricted to
metric, scoring, and submission-format information (metric name, direction, required submission
value type, metric quirks). Out-of-scope requests receive a fixed refusal. The oracle is not a simulation
of stakeholder interaction; it is a causal probe that asks whether the agent can elicit the missing
framing information when a truthful, scoped channel is available, isolating framing recognition
from realistic-user variability. Two idealizations apply in opposite directions: the one-shot protocol
understates what richer multi-turn clarification could recover, while truthful, always-available answers
overstate what noisy real stakeholders would yield. We therefore read ∆ask as a causal diagnostic for
whether missing framing information suffices to recover performance when delivered perfectly, not
as a deployment estimate. Oracle-family effects (Claude Haiku 4.6) cannot be ruled out; we mitigate
by constraining answers to manifest fields under the answer-only protocol.

Axis–source-benchmark confound. Axis is confounded with source benchmark by design: target
ambiguity is instantiated on DSBench, while objective ambiguity is instantiated on MLE-bench.
This pairing is principled—DSBench exposes clean tabular targets that allow controlled target
interventions, while MLE-bench contains Kaggle competitions where the metric is central to model
selection, thresholding, and submission formatting—but it means effect-size differences across the
two suites should not be interpreted as a causal comparison between target and objective ambiguity.
Throughout the paper we report and interpret each suite independently and emphasize the qualitative
failure signatures within each axis. Full cross-benchmark ablations (e.g., target ambiguity on MLE-
bench-style tasks where feasible, objective ambiguity on DSBench tasks with decision-relevant metric
variation) are left to future work.


                                                     13
      Fully Specified Task                                                                 Act Without Clarification
                                              Ambiguous Observation

      Prompt: predict count                                                                Agent Action:
                                  remove      Prompt: predict value          act without
      Data: {. . . , count}    framing cues                                    asking      • Commits to target = val_2
                                              Data: {. . . , val_1, val_2}
      Submission Format: ID,                                                               • Produces valid pipeline
                                              Submission Format: ID,
      count                                   prediction                                   Ground Truth:
                                                                                           • Evaluator expects val_1
     Framing determined from                  val_1 and val_2 are both
                                              plausible targets
     local cues.                                                                           → Unflagged Misframing


Figure 3: Conceptual overview: from specified task to unflagged misframing. Ambig-DS converts
fully specified tasks (left) into ambiguous observations that remain executable (middle). An agent
acting without clarification may produce a technically valid pipeline under an unintended framing,
resulting in an unflagged misframing (right).


Construction- and oracle-family bias. Benchmark construction is model-assisted: Claude Opus
4.7 proposes prompt edits and supports verification, and Claude Haiku 4.6 verbalizes oracle answers
under the Ask condition while Claude Haiku 4.5 also appears as an evaluated backbone. This could
introduce model-family bias in two places. First, the cross-verifier audit (Appendix C.3) tests whether
retained candidates satisfy the checklist across non-Claude verifiers, but it does not prove that non-
Claude generators would have proposed the same candidate distribution. Second, although the oracle
is constrained to short, manifest-grounded answers under the answer-only protocol, oracle phrasing
could still interact with agent instruction-following behavior. We mitigate by inheriting θ⋆ from
source benchmarks, scoring with the original evaluators, applying human review, auditing with GPT-
and Gemini-family verifiers, swapping the oracle to GPT-5.4 for the same-family-attack-sharpest
agent (Appendix C.4), and confirming that the degradation/recovery pattern holds for non-Claude
agents. Generation- and oracle-family effects nonetheless cannot be fully ruled out.

Dataset size and prevalence interpretation. The dataset is modest in size (51 paired Target
tasks, 61 paired Objective tasks). Combined with the controlled-interventions design, Ambig-DS
estimates should be read as diagnostic evidence of failure modes under verified ambiguity, not
as precise prevalence estimates over the population of all data-science tasks. Confidence intervals
(Appendix C.9) and within-suite paired tests (Appendix C.8) quantify the uncertainty of the diagnostic
effects we do report.

Open-weights replication. Our model selection prioritizes capability range (efficient and frontier-
class API models from three families) over weight access. We do not include open-weights backbones
in the headline tables. Because the released task packages, evaluators, oracle protocol, and judge
prompts are public, replicating Ambig-DS on open-weights agents requires only re-running the
evaluation harness; we view this as a natural next step rather than a limitation of the benchmark itself.

Recognition–commitment confound under Ambig. The Ambiguous condition has no clarification
channel by construction (§5), so ∆ambig cannot fully disentangle two failure modes: (i) the agent fails
to recognize the underdetermination, and (ii) the agent recognizes it but commits silently anyway.
The recognition audit (Appendix C.5) bounds this confound at the trace level: user-overridable
flagging in the final answer never exceeds 4% on Ambig-DS-Target even when traces acknowledge
the ambiguity, so the silent-commitment characterization holds at the answer-facing level on Target;
on Objective the confound is empirically negligible.

B    LLM Usage Statement

We used large language models to assist with writing-level edits, including polishing prose, condens-
ing text, improving clarity, formatting tables, and identifying relevant citations. We also used coding
agents for implementation support, debugging, and experiment management. In addition, LLMs
were used as part of the dataset construction pipeline for generating candidate ambiguous variants,
verifying candidate tasks under a fixed checklist, answering clarification questions under a restricted
oracle protocol, and judging objective-framing diagnostics as described in the paper. All research
questions, benchmark design decisions, experimental methodology, analyses, and conclusions were


                                                            14
 Benchmark                                  Executable Task   Predictive DS/ML   Controlled Ambig.      Ask–Act Eval.   # Tasks for ML/DS
 DSBench Jing et al. [2024]                       ✓                   ✓                  –                   –                 74
 MLE-bench Chan et al. [2024]                     ✓                   ✓                  –                   –                 75
 DataSciBench Zhang et al. [2025a]                ✓                   ✓                  –                   –                222
 CoTA Li et al. [2025]                          partial               –                partial             partial              –
 Gomm et al. Gomm et al. [2025]                   –                   –                  ✓                   –                 –
 AmbiQT Bhaskar et al. [2023]                     ✓                   –                  ✓                   –                 –
 ClarEval Li et al. [2026]                        ✓                   –                  ✓                   ✓                  –
 Ambig-SWE Vijayvargiya et al. [2026]             ✓                   –                  ✓                   ✓                500
 Ambig-DS (ours)                                  ✓                   ✓                  ✓                   ✓                112


Table 4: Comparison to related benchmarks. Prior work studies controlled ambiguity and ask–act
behavior in settings such as code generation, software engineering, tool use, question answering,
and tabular analysis. Ambig-DS differs in domain and failure mode: it targets executable predictive
data-science workflows where ambiguity changes the prediction target or evaluation objective of an
end-to-end modeling task. # Tasks for ML/DS reports task counts only for benchmarks involving
end-to-end agentic ML/DS pipelines; dashes indicate benchmarks operating in non-comparable
settings (e.g., text-to-SQL, software engineering, or single-turn code generation). Ambig-DS’s 112
paired tasks at approximately one hour of average wall-clock time per instance (well below the
per-task budgets in §5, since many instances finish in minutes) across five models and three evaluation
conditions, the benchmark required roughly 2,970 compute-hours in total, comparable in scale to
DSBench (74 tasks) and MLE-bench (75 tasks, with a 24-hour timeout per task).

      Source                                     Axis         Screened       Included            Rejected       Total Instances
                                        †
      DSBench (data modeling)                   Target           74              51                23                   102
      MLE-bench‡                                Metric           75              61                14                   122
      Total                                         –            149             112               37                   224

Table 5: Benchmark composition and filtering summary. We retain only candidates whose edited
prompt–data observation admits plausible, and decision-relevant ambiguity while preserving the
original task. Each included task yields one ambiguous variant and one fully specified counterpart, so
Total Instances is twice Included (paired ambiguous + fully specified) and is not the screened-task
count. † Common DSBench rejection reasons include multiple or unclear targets, target cue leakage,
and invalid edits. ‡ Common MLE-bench rejection reasons include tasks too heavy for the harness,
metrics remaining obvious from task or submission format, and alternative metrics not being decision-
relevant.


developed and validated by the authors. The authors reviewed and approved all generated text, code,
prompts, annotations, and experimental outputs used in the paper.

C     Additional Experimental Details

C.1    Benchmark Comparison and Composition

Figure 3 provides a conceptual overview of how Ambig-DS converts a fully specified task into an
ambiguous observation that can elicit an unflagged misframing. Table 4 shows the comparison of
Ambig-DS to other benchmarks and Table 5 shows the benchmark composition.

C.2    Decoy Analysis

Construction. For each task, we construct the decoy in two steps. (i) Rank-mapping. We select the
visible features with the lowest absolute Spearman correlation to the true target (the bottom ∼ 70%
of features, clamped to between 4 and 40 features), standardize each, and sum the standardized values
within each row to obtain one synthetic score per training example. We rank training rows by this
synthetic score, rank the true-target values separately, and assign the smallest true-target value to
the lowest-scoring row, the second-smallest to the next row, and so on. This gives the decoy the
same marginal as the true target but a different feature-derived ordering. (ii) Noise calibration. To
target equal feature-predictability between the two candidates, we add per-task calibrated label noise:
for classification we swap a fraction η of labels between random pairs (preserving the marginal);


                                                                      15
Table 6: Decoy-target validation for target-ambiguity tasks (n = 51). We report diagnostics over
retained target-ambiguity instances. Low target–decoy correlation and matched marginals indicate
that the intended target is not identifiable from simple target-comparison cues, while a small CV-
signal gap indicates that the decoy approximates the true target’s predictability from features and is
therefore not readily separable by a learnability comparison; residual outliers are reported in the table
rather than dropped to preserve task coverage (max gap ≈ 0.30 on 7 tasks where the noise-calibration
binary search did not reach the 0.10 tier). Marginal distributions match exactly for all retained tasks
by construction.

      Diagnostic                                           Mean      Median     90th pct.    Max
      |ρSpearman (y, ydecoy )|                             0.059      0.018      0.161      0.455
      |rPearson (y, ydecoy )|                              0.061      0.019      0.161      0.630
      KS statistic, true vs. decoy (regression)            0.000      0.000      0.000      0.000
      Absolute CV-signal gap (HistGradientBoosting)        0.042      0.018      0.102      0.304
      Absolute CV-signal gap (LightGBM)                    0.050      0.020      0.120      0.291


for regression we add Gaussian noise of std. η · std(y) to the rank-mapped decoy values and re-
rank-map onto sort(y) (preserving the marginal exactly). We binary-search η to drive the 3-fold
HistGradientBoosting score of the decoy toward the true target, targeting a gap below 0.02 when
possible (AUC for binary classification, accuracy for multiclass, R2 for regression).

Validation. The target-ambiguity axis relies on the added target being a plausible alternative
rather than an obvious distractor or a recoverable construction artifact. We therefore audit retained
decoys along three dimensions: marginal similarity, row-wise correlation with the true target, and
predictability from visible features. Table 6 shows that marginals match exactly for all retained tasks,
target–decoy correlations are low for most tasks, and CV-signal gaps are typically small, indicating
that the decoy is not separable from the true target by simple distributional or learnability cues.
Figure 4 visualizes the same diagnostics and shows that most tasks concentrate near low correlation
and low CV-signal gap, with a small number of outliers.
We also run a direct inferability audit. Each selector in Table 7 attempts to identify the intended
target from the ambiguous prompt–data observation alone, using marginal entropy, cross-validated
learnability, or LLM schema/prompt reasoning. Selector F additionally probes naturalistic frontier-
LLM domain reasoning over val_1/val_2 distributions, autocorrelation, and domain priors, since
selectors A–E do not test this channel; its accuracy (56.9%, CI [43.2%, 70.0%]) is the highest in
the audit but still includes chance, indicating residual but non-systematic domain-prior leakage.
All heuristic and LLM selectors have 95% Wilson confidence intervals that include chance: the
cross-validation selectors (B, C) sit essentially on chance, and the LLM selectors with and without
the original task prompt (D, E) deliver point estimates above 50% but with lower CI bounds at or just
below chance, indicating at most weak prompt-leakage signal once the original task description is
given to the LLM.
The CV-parity constraint is a construction target rather than a hard guarantee: 29 of 51 retained tasks
meet a 0.02 HistGradientBoosting gap, 40 meet 0.05, and 44 meet 0.10; the remaining tasks retain
the closest candidate that satisfies the marginal-match and low-correlation filters. Table 6 therefore
reports the final validation gaps, including these residual outliers.

C.3   Cross-Verifier Audit

Because LLMs assist benchmark construction, we audit whether filtering decisions depend on a
single model family. We re-run the verification checklist from Section G.3 using three verifier models:
Claude Opus 4.7, GPT-5.4, and Gemini 3.1 Pro. Each verifier receives the same candidate package
information and independently judges the four retention criteria: plausible alternatives, ambiguity
preservation, decision relevance, and task preservation. We measure percentage agreement with the
final human-reviewed decision for each criterion and for the overall retain/reject decision.
Table 8 reports the agreement results. The goal of this audit is not to replace human review, but to
check whether the retained benchmark depends on Claude-specific judgments. High agreement across
non-Claude verifiers indicates that the retained/rejected decisions are broadly legible across model


                                                   16
Figure 4: Distribution of decoy-quality diagnostics across retained target-ambiguity tasks. Most
target–decoy correlations are near zero, and most CV-signal gaps are small after calibration, indicating
that the intended target is not recoverable from simple correlation or learnability cues.

Table 7: Target inferability audit on the 51 retained target-ambiguity tasks. Each selector attempts to
identify the intended target column from the ambiguous prompt–data observation alone. Accuracies
near 50% indicate that the selector cannot recover the intended target from that cue. Selectors A–C
probe distributional and learnability cues; D–E probe LLM schema/prompt cues; F probes naturalistic
frontier-LLM domain reasoning over val_1/val_2 distributions, autocorrelation, and domain priors.
All selectors A–F have 95% Wilson confidence intervals that include chance. Selector D (LLM with
the original task prompt) reaches the highest A–E point estimate at 62.7%, with a lower CI bound of
49.0%, indicating at most a weak prompt-leakage signal once the original task description is given to
the LLM.
 Selector                                                                           n         Accuracy
 Random choice                                                                       –          50.0%
 A — Marginal-entropy heuristic                                                     51   58.8% [45.2%, 71.2%]
 B — Basic CV (HistGradientBoosting)                                                51   49.0% [35.9%, 62.3%]
 C — Strong CV (LightGBM, 200 trees, 3-fold)                                        51   51.0% [37.7%, 64.1%]
 D — LLM with original prompt (Claude Opus 4.7, 3 seeds)                            51   62.7% [49.0%, 74.7%]
 E — LLM, schema + data only (Claude Opus 4.7, 3 seeds)                             51   54.9% [41.4%, 67.7%]
 F — Frontier LLM, naturalistic domain prompt (Gemini 3.1 Pro + GPT-5.4, 3 seeds)   51   56.9% [43.2%, 70.0%]



families. This mitigates, but does not eliminate, the possibility that Claude-assisted generation shaped
the candidate distribution before filtering. The corresponding evaluation-stage audit—judge agree-
ment, human override rate, and cross-family judge/oracle robustness—is reported in Appendix C.4.

C.4   Judge and Oracle Reliability

The objective-suite diagnostics (Table 3) rest on a five-call Claude-judge panel with majority vote and
human spot-check. We audit this evaluation stage along three axes: judge noise, human override, and
cross-family robustness of both judge and oracle. Table 9 summarizes the four diagnostics; all are
computed on the Ambig-DS-Objective runs except the oracle robustness column, which is restricted
to the Claude-evaluated model where the same-family attack is sharpest.


                                                      17
Table 8: Cross-verifier agreement for benchmark filtering (target and objective tasks). Each verifier
applies the same checklist to candidate variants; agreement is measured against the final human-
reviewed decision. Values report percentage agreement.

          Verifier             Retain    Plaus. alt.    Ambig. pres.     Dec. rel.   Task pres.
          Claude Opus 4.7       85%         86%            83%             79%           80%
          GPT-5.4               80%         89%            83%             71%           79%
          Gemini 3.1 Pro        81%         78%            80%             80%           79%

Table 9: Evaluation-stage reliability audit. Inter-judge κ measures agreement among the five Claude-
judge calls; human override is the spot-check correction rate; cross-judge κ measures agreement
between Claude-majority and GPT-majority labels on the same runs; oracle ∆ask shift reports headline
change under a GPT oracle for the most-attackable (Claude-evaluated) cell.

              Diagnostic                                                         Value
              Inter-judge agreement (Fleiss’s κ, 5 Claude calls)                0.78
              Human override rate (Ambig-DS-Objective)                         5.9 %
              Cross-family judge agreement (Cohen’s κ, Claude vs. GPT)          0.74
              Claude-Haiku ∆ask shift, Target (Claude → GPT oracle)        +0.20 → +0.18
              Claude-Haiku ∆ask shift, Objective (Claude → GPT oracle)     +0.03 → +0.03



Judge noise. Inter-judge agreement across the five Claude-Haiku judge calls is high on the four-
class label space (Fleiss’s κ = 0.78), indicating that majority labels are not artifacts of a single noisy
call.

Human override. A human reviewer spot-checked the majority labels for all Ambig-DS-Objective
runs. Overrides occurred in 5.9% of cases, none of which moved a (model, condition) cell of Table 3
by more than two percentage points; the reported numbers are post-override.

Cross-family judge. We re-classify all objective-suite runs with a GPT-5.4 judge under the same
prompt and majority-vote protocol. Cohen’s κ between the Claude-majority labels and GPT-majority
labels is 0.74. Per-cell shifts in Table 3 are within ±4 percentage points and the qualitative pat-
tern (Ambig. silent-failure rates dominated by misframing + abdication; sharp drop under Ask) is
preserved.

Cross-family oracle. We re-run the Ask condition for Claude-Haiku-4.5 with a GPT-5.4 oracle
under the same answer-only protocol. ∆ask shifts from +0.20 (Claude oracle) to +0.18 (GPT oracle)
on Target and from +0.03 to +0.03 on Objective; sign and magnitude are preserved. The same-family
inflation hypothesis is therefore not supported by the data.

C.5   Recognition Audit: Decomposing ∆ambig

The Ambiguous condition does not provide a clarification channel, so a naive reading of ∆ambig
conflates two distinct failures: non-recognition (the agent never notices the underdetermination) and
recognized-but-unflagged commitment (the agent notices but proceeds without flagging). To separate
them we re-run the LLM judge on the trajectory and final answer of every Ambiguous-condition run
and classify two facets independently (Table 10). Trace captures whether the agent’s reasoning or
code names the ambiguity: explicit ack (e.g., “no target column is specified”), implicit/hedged ack
(vague aside, no real engagement), or silent (proceeds as if the spec were unambiguous). Answer
captures how the final summary presents the chosen framing: flagged as user-overridable (“I assumed
X; let me know if you wanted Y ”), named but not flagged (states the choice without inviting override),
or self-evident (no assumption acknowledged). The two facets are scored independently because
trace acknowledgment without an overridable flag in the answer is itself a behavioral failure under
our protocol — nothing in the Ambig. condition prevents agents from flagging, hedging, abstaining,
or producing a degenerate baseline. Only substantive runs (after dropping API errors, timeouts, and
empty traces) are scored.


                                                   18
Table 10: Recognition audit on Ambiguous-condition runs. Trace and answer facets are scored
independently per run; rows sum to 100% within each facet. Trace (reasoning/code): Explicit —
the agent verbally or in code names the underdetermination (e.g., “no target column is specified”);
Hedged — vague aside or single-line note without real engagement; Silent — proceeds as if the spec
were unambiguous. Answer (final summary): Overridable — names the chosen framing and invites
the user to override (“I assumed X; let me know if you wanted Y ”); Named — states the choice
without inviting override; Self-evident — never mentions an assumption was made.

                                            Trace (%)                   Answer (%)
      Suite       Model              Explicit Hedged Silent Overridable Named Self-evident
      Target      Gemini 3 Flash       64       25       11        0         75         25
      Target      GPT-5.4 Nano         0        52       48        0         50         50
      Target      Claude Haiku 4.5     2        44       54        0         12         88
      Target      Gemini 3.1 Pro       42       46       12        0         56         44
      Target      GPT-5.4              30       28       41        4         65         30
      Objective   Gemini 3 Flash       0        9        91        0          0        100
      Objective   GPT-5.4 Nano         0        0        100       0          0        100
      Objective   Claude Haiku 4.5     0        0        100       0          0        100
      Objective   Gemini 3.1 Pro       0        0        100       0          0        100
      Objective   GPT-5.4              0        0        100       0         18        82



On Ambig-DS-Objective, trace acknowledgment is below 10% for every model and overridable
flagging is 0% for every model, so ∆ambig on this suite measures non-recognition essentially without
confound from recognized guessing. On Ambig-DS-Target, trace recognition varies widely (explicit
acknowledgment ranges from 0% for GPT-5.4 Nano and 2% for Claude Haiku 4.5 to 64% for Gemini
3 Flash), so a portion of ∆ambig on this suite reflects recognized-but-unflagged commitment rather
than failure to notice. Crucially, the overridable-flag rate in the final answer never exceeds 4% on
any model in either suite: even agents that recognize the ambiguity in their trace almost never flag
the resulting commitment as a user-overridable assumption. The silent-commitment characterization
of the failure mode is therefore preserved at the answer-facing level, while the recognition column
quantifies how much of the trace-level confound remains and where (∼ 0 on Objective; substantial
on Target for some models).

C.6   Score Conditional on Diagnostic Category

The category rates in Tables 2–3 describe how often runs land in each failure mode but not how
well runs within each category score. As a sanity check, Table 11 reports the mean normalized
score conditional on diagnostic category. The decomposition is consistent with the misframing
story: intended-framing runs score close to (and often slightly above) the model’s Full mean — the
selection is biased toward easier-to-disambiguate tasks — while alternative-framing runs collapse
to substantially lower scores. On Objective, Degenerate runs P score near zero. Invalid and Timeout
runs score zero by definition and are omitted. By construction, c pc · S̄c in each row reproduces the
corresponding Ambig. or Ask cell of Table 1 within rounding.

C.7   Task Package

Each Ambig-DS instance is a comprehensive unit comprising the original fully specified task, its
paired ambiguous variant, the intended framing, and a set of validated alternative framings. To
facilitate diagnostic analysis, each package includes:

       • Target Metadata: Records the identity of the true target and decoy, the feature anonymization
         map, and the specific features and correlations used in decoy generation.
       • Objective Metadata: Defines the intended metric, its optimization direction, submission
         format requirements, and the set of plausible alternative objectives.
       • Evaluator: The original scoring script remains unchanged to ensure performance drops are
         attributable solely to framing failures rather than modified scoring rules.


                                                    19
Table 11: Mean normalized score by diagnostic category on Ambig-DS-Target (top) and Ambig-
DS-Objective (bottom). Each cell is the mean score over runs classified into that category by
Tables 2–3. Categories with n = 0 are marked “–”. Full reproduces Table 1 for reference.

                                                    Full     Intended ↑       Alternative ↓
                       Suite    Model              mean Ambig. Ask            Ambig. Ask
                       Target   Gemini 3 Flash      0.63     0.85     0.63     0.17    0.25
                       Target   GPT-5.4 Nano        0.49     0.70     0.55     0.13    0.12
                       Target   Claude Haiku 4.5    0.56     0.85     0.58     0.17    0.10
                       Target   Gemini 3.1 Pro      0.64     0.80     0.62     0.13    0.13
                       Target   GPT-5.4             0.61     0.85     0.70     0.14    0.15

                                            Full     Intended ↑       Alternative ↓    Degenerate ↓
           Suite        Model               mean Ambig. Ask           Ambig. Ask       Ambig. Ask
           Objective    Gemini 3 Flash      0.31      0.30     0.37    0.10       –     0.00   0.00
           Objective    GPT-5.4 Nano        0.11      0.13     0.19    0.00       –     0.00   0.00
           Objective    Claude Haiku 4.5    0.27      0.40     0.27    0.10       –     0.00   0.00
           Objective    Gemini 3.1 Pro      0.27      0.40     0.45    0.20     0.15    0.00   0.00
           Objective    GPT-5.4             0.26      0.30     0.33    0.05       –     0.00   0.00


The intended framing is inherited from the source task and used only for scoring and diagnostic
analysis. The ambiguous variant is therefore not intended to have a uniquely correct semantic reading
from the agent-facing prompt–data observation alone; rather, it tests whether agents recognize when
multiple plausible framings remain and seek clarification before committing.

C.8   Statistical Significance Tests

We assess the reliability of the main performance effects with paired one-sided Wilcoxon signed-rank
tests over per-task normalized scores. For each model and ambiguity axis, we compare matched task
scores across conditions: Full versus Ambig. tests whether ambiguity degrades performance, and
Ask versus Ambig. tests whether clarification improves performance. The hypotheses are
                        H1drop : Sfull > Sambig ,          H1recovery : Sask > Sambig .
Pairing is done at the task level, so each source task contributes one matched score pair for the same
model and axis. Tasks missing either condition are excluded from the corresponding test.
We report per-axis tests in Table 1, rather than pooling target and objective tasks, because the two
axes are instantiated on different source benchmarks and have different failure mechanisms. We use
scipy.stats.wilcoxon with alternative="greater" and zero_method="wilcox", which
discards zero-difference pairs. We report one-sided p-values with significance markers: ∗ p < 0.05,
∗∗
   p < 0.01, and ∗∗∗ p < 0.001.

Normalization validity. DSBench scores are normalized using the Relative Performance Gap
(RPG): max((pi − bi )/(gi − bi ), 0), where pi is agent performance, bi is a baseline, and gi is the best
known performance. MLE-bench scores compare agent performance to the Kaggle median. Both are
normalized to [0, 1] before aggregation. We do not aggregate across axes — all comparisons between
target and objective ambiguity are made within-axis, so cross-source aggregation is never required
for the main claims.

C.9   Bootstrap Confidence Intervals

To complement the Wilcoxon p-values, we report paired bootstrap 95% confidence intervals for
the mean deltas ∆ambig and ∆ask . For each model and axis, we resample matched task indices with
replacement (B = 10,000 replicates) and compute the mean of the per-task score differences in
each resample. The 2.5th and 97.5th percentiles of the bootstrap distribution define the interval.
Because resampling preserves task-level pairing, the intervals reflect the same matched structure
as the Wilcoxon tests. A confidence interval that excludes zero corroborates the corresponding
significance test. We report per-axis intervals in Table 12.


                                                      20
D     Dataset Examples

We provide two representative Ambig-DS examples: one objective-ambiguity instance from MLE-
bench and one target-ambiguity instance from DSBench. These examples illustrate what is changed,
what is preserved, and what information is available to the agent.

D.1   Objective Ambiguity: aerial-cactus-identification

The original aerial-cactus-identification task asks participants to predict whether each aerial
image contains a cactus. In the fully specified version, the prompt explicitly states that submissions
are evaluated by area under the ROC curve between the predicted probability and the observed binary
target. Thus, the intended framing is clear: the target is has_cactus, the submitted values should be
real-valued probabilities, and the objective is ROC-AUC.
In the objective-ambiguous variant, we leave the data package, target column, and submission format
unchanged, but remove the metric-specific cue from the prompt. The original evaluation block states:

         Submissions are evaluated on area under the ROC curve between the predicted
         probability and the observed target.

The ambiguous version replaces this with generic language:

         Submissions are evaluated against a held-out test set using a standard evaluation
         procedure for this task.

The submission instructions still require a file with columns id,has_cactus. However, the prompt
no longer tells the agent whether the submitted has_cactus values will be evaluated as probabilities,
hard labels, rankings, or by another plausible binary-classification metric. This makes the objective
underdetermined while preserving the target and data.

Data package.     The agent-facing public data package contains:

prepared/public/
    train.csv                        # id, has_cactus
    train.zip                        # training images
    test.zip                         # test images
    sample_submission.csv            # id, has_cactus

The private grading data contains:

prepared/private/
    test.csv                         # id, has_cactus

Thus, the agent sees the same files in the full and ambiguous versions. The only edited component is
the prompt’s metric description. The intended metric is stored in the metric manifest for clarification
and auditing: for this task, the hidden evaluator uses ROC-AUC, higher is better, and expects
real-valued predictions for has_cactus. During grading, the submitted CSV is scored against the
held-out test.csv using the original MLE-bench evaluator. Separately, the diagnostic judge inspects
the agent trajectory and submission to determine whether the run optimized the intended AUC-style
objective or a plausible alternative such as hard-label accuracy.

D.2   Target Ambiguity: bike-sharing-demand

The original bike-sharing-demand task asks participants to forecast hourly bike rental demand.
In the fully specified DSBench task, the prompt identifies the target as count, describes it as the total
number of rentals, and the sample submission has columns datetime,count. The training data also
contains related columns such as casual, registered, and count.
In the target-ambiguous variant, we remove target-identifying language from the prompt and replace
the target-specific submission cue with generic wording. For example, references to “predicted


                                                  21
count” and “actual count” become “predicted value” and “actual value.” The data-field description no
longer names casual, registered, or count. The original target count is renamed to val_1, and
a plausible decoy target is added as val_2. Both candidate targets are visible in the training set but
absent from the test set.
The prompt metadata records the removed target cues and the plausible alternatives now consistent
with the observation, including predicting total rentals, predicting a user-type-specific rental quantity,
or predicting a generic demand-related numeric value. The intended framing inherited from the
source task remains: predict the original count target, now represented as val_1 in the ambiguous
training data.

Data package before ambiguity.        The original DSBench package contains:

train.csv:
    datetime, season, holiday, workingday, weather,
    temp, atemp, humidity, windspeed,
    casual, registered, count

test.csv:
    datetime, season, holiday, workingday, weather,
    temp, atemp, humidity, windspeed

sampleSubmission.csv:
    datetime, count

Here, both the prompt and the sample submission identify count as the intended target.

Data package after ambiguity.       The ambiguous package contains:

prompt.txt
prompt.meta.json
_manifest.json
train.csv:
    datetime, f_01, f_02, f_03, f_04,
    f_05, f_06, f_07, f_08, val_1, val_2

test.csv:
    datetime, f_01, f_02, f_03, f_04,
    f_05, f_06, f_07, f_08

sample_submission.csv:
    datetime, prediction

The manifest records the hidden construction details: val_1 is the true target inherited from count,
val_2 is the decoy target, and the feature map links the anonymized features back to the original
columns. Decoy diagnostics show that the two candidate targets have matched marginal distributions
and low correlation, so the intended target is not identifiable from simple distributional checks.
The agent receives only the ambiguous prompt and the anonymized train/test/sample-submission
files. It does not see the manifest. During grading, the runner aligns the submitted prediction file
to the original DSBench answer format and scores it against the held-out count answers using the
original RMSLE evaluator. In the clarification condition, the answerer uses the manifest to answer
target-identification questions truthfully, while avoiding unrelated leakage such as test statistics,
decoy construction details, or modeling advice.

E     Additional Results

E.1   Bootstrap CI

Table 12 shows paired bootstrap 95% confidence intervals for the mean deltas from Table 1.


                                                   22
               Axis        Model               ∆ambig [95% CI] ↓      ∆ask [95% CI] ↑
               Objective   Gemini 3 Flash     −0.09 [−0.13, −0.05] +0.09 [+0.03, +0.15]
               Objective   GPT-5.4 Nano       −0.06 [−0.11, −0.02] +0.05 [+0.03, +0.07]
               Objective   Claude Haiku 4.5   −0.04 [−0.07, −0.01] +0.03 [0.00, +0.06]
               Objective   Gemini 3.1 Pro     −0.04 [−0.07, −0.01] +0.04 [0.01, +0.07]
               Objective   GPT-5.4            −0.04 [−0.06, −0.02] +0.04 [0.02, +0.06]
               Target      Gemini 3 Flash     −0.19 [−0.32, −0.08]   +0.17 [+0.08, +0.28]
               Target      GPT-5.4 Nano       −0.10 [−0.18, −0.02]   +0.06 [+0.01, +0.09]
               Target      Claude Haiku 4.5   −0.24 [−0.35, −0.13]   +0.20 [+0.09, +0.31]
               Target      Gemini 3.1 Pro     −0.15 [−0.23, −0.08]   +0.11 [+0.06, +0.17]
               Target      GPT-5.4            −0.29 [−0.37, −0.21]   +0.20 [+0.11, +0.29]

      Table 12: Paired bootstrap 95% confidence intervals for the mean deltas from Table 1.


E.2   Ask–Act Failure Analysis

To better understand ask–act miscalibration, we annotate clarification behavior with an LLM judge.
For each condition, we run five independent judge calls and assign the majority label. For fully
specified tasks under the permissive policy, the judge classifies unnecessary questions into style
fishing, restating obvious information, or out-of-scope requests. For ambiguous tasks under the
conservative policy, the judge classifies failures into silently defaulted or asked wrong topic. We
manually inspect a subset of labels for consistency.
Table 13 shows that ask behavior is highly prompt-sensitive. The permissive policy yields high asking
on ambiguous tasks, but also high asking on fully specified tasks. The conservative policy sharply
reduces unnecessary asking, but often suppresses asking on genuinely ambiguous tasks, especially
for objective ambiguity.
Table 14 shows that over-asking is rarely a legitimate response to missing task information. On
fully specified tasks, unnecessary questions are dominated by style preferences, restatements of
information already present in the prompt or data, and out-of-scope requests for modeling guidance
or extra constraints.
Table 15 shows the complementary failure mode. Under the conservative policy, models often do not
ask the wrong question; instead, they silently choose a default framing and proceed. This is especially
pronounced for objective ambiguity, where the task remains executable despite the missing metric.
Together, these diagnostics suggest that prompt wording changes the ask–act operating point, but
does not produce robust sensitivity to decision-relevant ambiguity.


F     Case Studies

We include two representative examples illustrating how task-framing ambiguity changes agent
behavior. The first shows a target-framing failure, where the agent constructs a plausible but
unintended prediction target. The second shows an objective-framing failure, where the target is clear
but the omitted metric changes the required prediction semantics.

F.1   Target Ambiguity: bike-sharing-demand

In bike-sharing-demand, the fully specified task asks participants to forecast bike rental count.
In the ambiguous variant, the original target is renamed to val_1, a plausible decoy target is
added as val_2, and target-identifying prompt and submission cues are removed. The agent sees a
training table with datetime, anonymized features, val_1, and val_2, but the test set contains only
datetime and features.
Gemini 3 Flash did not ask for clarification. Instead, it inferred that val_1 and val_2 corresponded
to the original bike-sharing fields casual and registered, and constructed a new target:

                                      count = val_1 + val_2.


                                                   23
 Axis        Model                         Permissive ask policy                              Conservative ask policy
                                Ask on Ambig. ↑   Ask on Full ↓    CalibScore ↑   Ask on Ambig. ↑    Ask on Full ↓     CalibScore ↑
 Objective   Perfect                 100                0             1.00              100               0               1.00
 Objective   Gemini 3 Flash          95               95              0.10               16               5               0.27
 Objective   GPT-5.4 Nano            79               87              0.22               0                5               0.00
 Objective   Claude Haiku 4.5        100              100             0.00               5                5               0.10
 Objective   Gemini 3.1 Pro          100               33             0.80               70               0               0.82
 Objective   GPT-5.4                 100               87             0.23               0                0               0.00
 Target      Perfect                 100                0             1.00              100               0               1.00
 Target      Gemini 3 Flash          98               88              0.21               96               2               0.97
 Target      GPT-5.4 Nano            100               98             0.04               51               8               0.66
 Target      Claude Haiku 4.5        100              100             0.00               67               2               0.80
 Target      Gemini 3.1 Pro          98               51              0.65               94               0               0.97
 Target      GPT-5.4                 94               65              0.51               33               4               0.49


Table 13: Ask-policy sensitivity by ambiguity axis. We compare ask behavior under two clarification
policies. The permissive policy tells the agent that it may ask exactly one clarifying question or
write NONE. The conservative policy additionally instructs the agent to ask only when the task
cannot be solved from the prompt and data, to write NONE when the task is fully specified or
locally inferable, and states that unnecessary clarification is penalized. Ask on Ambig. measures
clarification recall on non-inferable, decision-relevant ambiguous tasks, where asking is preferred.
Ask on Full measures unnecessary clarification on fully specified tasks, where acting without asking is
preferred. CalibScore combines both into a single calibration metric: CalibScore = 2·AskOnAmbig·
(1 − AskOnFull)/(AskOnAmbig + (1 − AskOnFull)), where 1.00 denotes perfect calibration. The
Perfect row shows the target behavior. No model–policy combination we tested achieves consistent
calibration across both axes.

Table 14: Over-asking diagnostic on Full / Permissive (fully-specified prompt, permissive policy).
Correct behaviour is staying silent or asking about a real specification gap; Style fishing (Asks about
user taste), Restating obvious, and Out-of scope (asks about out-of-scope deliverables) are all forms
of over-asking.

                                                   Correct         Correct         Style      Restating       Out-of
              Model
                                                   (silent)       (real gap)      fishing     obvious         scope
              Gemini 3 Flash (Target)                  12%               2%         14%              6%        67%
              Gemini 3 Flash (Objective)                5%               3%          3%              3%        85%
              GPT-5.4 Nano (Target)                     2%               0%         61%             10%        27%
              GPT-5.4 Nano (Objective)                 21%               0%         41%             17%        21%
              Claude Haiku 4.5 (Target)                 0%               0%         88%              4%         8%
              Claude Haiku 4.5 (Objective)              0%               0%         62%              5%        33%
              Gemini 3.1 Pro (Target)                  49%               6%         10%              2%        33%
              Gemini 3.1 Pro (Objective)               67%               0%          5%              3%        25%
              GPT-5.4 (Target)                         35%               0%         51%              8%         6%
              GPT-5.4 (Objective)                      13%               0%         62%              0%        25%



The agent then trained a random-forest regression pipeline on this constructed target and produced a
valid submission. This is a plausible local interpretation of the anonymized data, but it is unsupported
by the prompt–data observation and differs from the intended source-task target.
This produces the characteristic Ambig-DS failure: the artifact is coherent and executable, but aligned
with a plausible unintended framing. The normalized score drops from 0.937 in the fully specified
task to 0.692 under ambiguity. When clarification is enabled, the oracle identifies the intended target,
and the score recovers to 0.937.

F.2       Objective Ambiguity: random-acts-of-pizza

In random-acts-of-pizza, the fully specified task states that submissions are evaluated by area
under the ROC curve between the predicted probability that a request receives pizza and the observed
binary outcome. Thus, the intended submission should contain real-valued probabilities in [0, 1]. In
the ambiguous variant, the metric description is replaced by a generic statement that submissions are
scored against held-out ground truth, while the target column and submission header remain visible.


                                                              24
Table 15: Under-asking diagnostic on Ambiguous / Conservative (hidden specification bit, conserva-
tive policy). Each row sums to ≈100%. The model should ask anyway about the hidden bit; Silently
defaulted is the under-asking failure where the model picks a default without acknowledging the
ambiguity.

                                                    Correct     Silently     Asked
                    Model
                                                    (asked)    defaulted   wrong topic
                    Gemini 3 Flash (Target)              96%        4%              0%
                    Gemini 3 Flash (Objective)            8%       84%              8%
                    GPT-5.4 Nano (Target)                49%       49%              2%
                    GPT-5.4 Nano (Objective)              0%      100%              0%
                    Claude Haiku 4.5 (Target)            67%       33%              0%
                    Claude Haiku 4.5 (Objective)          3%       97%              0%
                    Gemini 3.1 Pro (Target)              94%        6%              0%
                    Gemini 3.1 Pro (Objective)           70%       30%              0%
                    GPT-5.4 (Target)                     33%       67%              0%
                    GPT-5.4 (Objective)                   0%      100%              0%



Claude Haiku 4.5 trained classifiers for the binary target requester_received_pizza, but treated
the output as a hard binary prediction task. The final submission contained 0/1 values rather than
calibrated probabilities. This artifact is valid-looking under a plausible accuracy-style framing, but it
is misaligned with the intended AUC objective, where ranking by real-valued probability is essential.
The resulting performance drops from 0.589 in the fully specified task to 0.340 under ambiguity.
When clarification reveals that the metric is AUC over predicted probabilities, performance recovers
to 0.609. This case illustrates that objective ambiguity need not change the prediction target; instead,
it changes how predictions should be optimized, calibrated, and formatted.


G     Prompts

This appendix lists the prompts used for clarification, benchmark construction, verification, and
diagnostic annotation.

G.1   Evaluation Prompt

In the default condition, the agent receives the task description verbatim, wrapped with a short
instruction footer that names the data directory and the absolute path at which the submission CSV
must be written. Two near-identical wrappers are used; the only differences are surface wording and
whether the data directory or the workspace root is named.

MLE-bench metric-ambiguity wrapper. The agent’s prompt is the contents of full.md or
ambig_metric.md for the slug, followed by:
 ## Task instructions

 You are a data scientist. The dataset for this competition is in ‘./data/‘.
 Build a model and write your predictions to ‘<workspace>/_submission.csv‘ (absolute path). Do not write
      anything else outside the current working directory.




DSBench target-ambiguity wrapper.            The full prompt assembled per task is:
 You are a data scientist. I have a data modeling task.

 <TASK BODY: bike-sharing-demand.txt etc.>

 All data files (train.csv, test.csv, sample submission) are in: <workspace>/data
 After modeling, save the submission CSV to: <workspace>/data/_submission.csv
 You must run the code yourself and produce the file.




                                                    25
G.2   Clarification Protocol Prompts

Ask-or-act instruction. This prompt is prepended before modeling in the ask-enabled condition.
The agent must either ask one clarification question or output NONE.
[CLARIFY PROTOCOL –- read carefully]
Before doing any modeling, you may ask exactly ONE clarifying question to
the user.

  - You MAY first do a quick inspection of the data to inform your question
    –- e.g. read column headers, peek at a few rows, check basic shapes /
    dtypes, look at the sample submission. Keep this brief.
  - Then write your question (or the literal word ‘NONE‘) to:
        <workspace>/_question.txt
  - Keep the question under 50 words and self-contained (the user only sees
    that file, not your tool calls or notes).
  - After writing the file, STOP. Do NOT train a model, run cross-validation,
    or write a submission in this turn. The user will reply in the next turn
    with the answer (or with ‘NONE‘).




Target-ambiguity clarification oracle. This prompt is used by the clarification oracle for target-
ambiguity tasks. The oracle has access to the task manifest, including the intended target and decoy
target, but must answer only the agent’s literal clarification question and must not reveal unrelated
information.
You are an expert helping a data-science agent on a Kaggle-style task.

The agent gets ONE clarifying question. You will be told:
  - the task name and target type,
  - the column structure of the data the agent sees, including which column is
    the true target and which is a synthetic decoy with the same marginal,
  - the agent’s question.

Reply in 1-2 short sentences. Be direct and honest.

CRITICAL –- scope rule:
  Answer ONLY what the agent literally asked. Do NOT volunteer any other
  information –- do not bring up the target column, val_1, val_2, or any
  other column unless the agent’s question is explicitly about it. If the
  question is about partitioning, grouping, evaluation metric, schema,
  meaning of column names, etc., answer THAT and stop. Do not also reveal
  which column is the target.

Allowed (only when the question is directly about it):
  - If the agent asks which column is the target / label / outcome / what to
    predict: name the true target column directly. Use the EXACT column
    name supplied to you in the user message under "True target column in
    train.csv:". DO NOT default to val_1. DO NOT guess. DO NOT pick the
    alphabetically-first option. Copy the value from the user message
    verbatim. The truth may be val_1 OR val_2 –- both occur with roughly
    equal frequency across tasks.
  - If the agent explicitly asks about val_1 vs val_2 (or about two
    columns having the same distribution): say which is the actual target
    (using the EXACT name from the user message) and that the other has
    the same marginal but is not a valid label.
  - Factual questions about target type (classification/regression),
    schema, evaluation metric, ID column.
  - Confirming or correcting an explicit assumption the agent stated in
    its question.

Forbidden:
  - Never use the word "decoy" in your reply. If you need to describe the
    non-target column, say it has "the same marginal distribution as the
    target but is not a valid label".
  - Do not reveal any test-set labels or test-set statistics.
  - Do not give exact CV scores or recommend models / toolchains.
  - Do not copy the task description verbatim.
  - Do not mention internal benchmark details ("decoy_pool", "rank_map",
    "anon_feature", manifest, ground-truth file paths, etc.).

If the agent asks you to do the modelling, write code, choose a toolchain,
or anything outside the scope of one short clarifying answer, reply exactly:
"REFUSE: that’s outside the scope of one clarifying answer."

If the agent’s question is empty or just "NONE", reply: "NONE".




                                                      26
Objective-ambiguity clarification oracle. This prompt is used by the clarification oracle for
objective-ambiguity tasks. The oracle has access to the metric manifest, including the intended
metric, optimization direction, submission value type, and metric-specific quirks, but must answer
only questions about the introduced objective ambiguity.
You are an expert helping a data-science agent on a Kaggle-style task.

The agent gets ONE clarifying question. The task description it received had
its evaluation/metric section neutralised half of the time –- the agent may NOT know the exact
scoring metric, scoring direction, or required submission value type
(probability vs. hard label, top-K, etc.).

You will be told:
  - the task name,
  - the true evaluation metric, a short description, and the required
    submission format,
  - whether the metric is lower-better or higher-better,
  - the agent’s question
  - whether this is a fully specified taks or one wihtout metric specification (see the VARIANT NOTE at
     the end).

Reply in 1-2 short sentences. Be direct and honest.

CRITICAL –- scope rule:
  Answer ONLY what the agent literally asked, in the metric / scoring /
  submission-format domain. Do NOT volunteer extra information.

Allowed (only when the question is directly about it):
  - The exact name and a brief description of the evaluation metric.
  - Whether higher or lower scores are better.
  - The required submission column structure and value type
    (probability vs. hard label, score per class, top-K list, continuous
    regression value, etc.).
  - Any metric-specific quirks (e.g. K=5 for MAP@K; only certain target
    columns are scored; scoring is on inspiratory phase only; eps clipping;
    asymmetry of RMSLE).
  - Confirming or correcting an explicit assumption the agent stated.

Forbidden (treat ANY of these as out-of-scope, even if the agent frames
the question around the metric or asks you to "confirm"):
  - Do not reveal any test-set labels or test-set statistics.
  - Do not give exact CV scores, thresholds, or recommend models / toolchains
    / hyperparameters / training procedures / validation strategies.
  - Do not write code for the agent.
  - Do not copy the task description verbatim.
  - Do not mention internal benchmark details (manifest files, ground-truth
    paths, "decoy", etc.).
  - Do not advise on FEATURE-SET decisions: which input columns to use
    or drop (e.g. "use only the ‘text‘ field", "ignore ‘id‘", "include
    column X"), even if the agent asks you to confirm.
  - Do not advise on FEATURE ENCODING: label-encoding, one-hot, target
    encoding, ordinal vs categorical, embeddings, scaling, etc.
  - Do not state or confirm rules about EXTERNAL DATA / pre-trained
    models / outside resources (e.g. "no external resources", "only local
    code", "no pretrained models"). The metric manifest does not cover
    competition rules.
  - Do not advise on TRAIN/VAL split, cross-validation, ensembling, or
    any modelling workflow detail.

If the agent asks you to do the modelling, write code, choose a toolchain,
suggest hyperparameters, choose features/encodings, confirm external-data
rules, or anything outside the metric / scoring / submission-format scope,
reply with EXACTLY this single line and nothing else:
"REFUSE: that’s outside the scope of one clarifying answer."

Do NOT append any extra sentence. Do NOT volunteer the metric, the
submission format, the scoring direction, or any other clarifying
information when refusing. The refusal must be the entire reply.

If the agent’s question contains BOTH an off-topic part AND an explicit
in-scope part (e.g. it asks both about hyperparameters AND about the
metric), answer ONLY the in-scope part in 1-2 sentences and ignore the
off-topic part –- do not say "REFUSE" in this case, and do not mention
that you are ignoring anything.

If the agent’s question is empty or just "NONE", reply: "NONE".

VARIANT NOTE: the agent’s evaluation/metric section WAS
neutralised. In-scope metric/scoring/submission-format questions




                                                      27
 are legitimate; answer them within the rules above.



Out-of-scope refusal template. This is the fixed response used when a clarification question
asks for information outside the introduced ambiguity, such as test-set statistics, validation results,
implementation advice, or construction details.
 REFUSE: that’s outside the scope of one clarifying answer.



Conservative ask-policy ablation. For the ask-policy sensitivity experiment, we also evaluate a
stricter prompting variant that instructs the agent to ask only when the task cannot be resolved from
the prompt and data package.
 [CLARIFY PROTOCOL –- read carefully]
 Ask only if the task cannot be solved from the prompt and data. If the
 task is fully specified or the answer can be inferred from local evidence,
 write NONE. Unnecessary clarification is penalized.

   - You MAY first do a quick inspection of the data to inform your decision
     –- e.g. read column headers, peek at a few rows, check basic shapes /
     dtypes, look at the sample submission. Keep this brief.
   - Then write your question (or the literal word ‘NONE‘) to:
         <workspace>/_question.txt
   - Keep the question under 50 words and self-contained (the user only sees
     that file, not your tool calls or notes).
   - After writing the file, STOP. Do NOT train a model, run cross-validation,
     or write a submission in this turn. The user will reply in the next turn
     with the answer (or with ‘NONE‘).



G.3   Benchmark Construction Prompts

This subsection gives the prompts used to construct and verify Ambig-DS variants. The construction
prompts make minimal edits that remove the relevant framing cue while preserving unrelated task
information. The verification prompt checks plausible alternatives, ambiguity preservation, decision
relevance, and task preservation.

Shared construction system prompt. Used for both target-ambiguity and objective-ambiguity
construction.
 You are an expert editor of data-science benchmark tasks.

 You will be given an original task description and, when available, data/package information for
      reference. Your goal is to produce a minimally edited task description that removes one specific
      framing cue while preserving all unrelated task information.

 Core principles:
 1. Minimal edits. Change only the wording needed to remove the targeted framing cue. Do not rewrite
      unrelated sections.
 2. Task preservation. The edited prompt must remain a natural, coherent data-science task description.
      It should not look corrupted, truncated, or intentionally adversarial.
 3. Axis isolation. Remove only the targeted information. If editing target ambiguity, preserve the
      evaluation objective whenever possible. If editing objective ambiguity, preserve the target, data
      description, and submission format.
 4. Ambiguity preservation. The edited prompt should not introduce new wording that reveals the hidden
      intended framing. The final prompt should remain compatible with at least two plausible framings
      along the targeted axis.
 5. No new information. Do not add facts, assumptions, hints, examples, or constraints not present in the
       original task.

 Return a JSON object:
 {
   "text": "edited task description",
   "removed": ["specific phrases, sentences, or cues removed or changed"],
   "plausible_alternatives": ["at least two plausible framings"],
   "notes": "brief notes on why the edit preserves the rest of the task"
 }



Target-ambiguity prompt rewriting. Used for DSBench target-ambiguity construction. The data
package has already been transformed to contain two candidate targets, e.g., val_1 and val_2; the
prompt editor must not reveal which one is intended.


                                                       28
Edit the task description to remove target-identifying language while preserving the rest of the task.

The data package has been transformed so that the original target and a plausible decoy target appear as
      generic candidate columns, e.g., val_1 and val_2. The test set contains neither candidate target,
     and the sample submission uses a generic prediction column.

Your edit should make the intended prediction target underdetermined from the prompt.

Instructions:
- Remove or genericize sentences that name the target concept or target column.
- Replace target-specific phrases such as "predict count", "forecast demand", or "the target is sale
     price" with generic language such as "predict the value" or "produce predictions".
- Genericize mathematical variable definitions that reveal the target identity, e.g., replace "$p_i$ is
     the predicted count" with "$p_i$ is the predicted value".
- Remove target-identifying rows or headers in prompt examples, if they reveal the intended target.
- Remove or genericize data-field descriptions that reveal the original target or related target
     decomposition.
- Preserve unrelated task context, evaluation metric descriptions, file descriptions, and modeling
     instructions.
- Do not mention val_1, val_2, the decoy construction, or the hidden intended target.
- Do not add any hint that one candidate target is more likely than another.

Return the edited task description and metadata in the required JSON format.



Objective-ambiguity prompt rewriting. Used for MLE-bench objective-ambiguity construction.
The target definition, data description, files, and required submission format are preserved.
Edit the task description to remove explicit evaluation-objective information while preserving the
     target and submission requirements.

Your edit should make the evaluation objective underdetermined from the prompt. The agent should still
     know what to predict and what file format to submit, but should not know which metric, scoring rule,
      optimization direction, thresholding rule, ranking rule, or metric-specific transformation will be
      used.

Instructions:
- Remove specific metric names such as AUC, log loss, RMSE, RMSLE, MAE, accuracy, F1, MAP@K, Pearson
     correlation, Levenshtein rate, or custom metric names.
- Remove metric formulas, optimization direction, leaderboard scoring rules, and metric-specific
     descriptions.
- Replace the Evaluation section with neutral language, e.g., "Submissions are evaluated against held-
     out ground truth using a standard evaluation procedure for this task."
- Preserve the target definition.
- Preserve the submission file columns and required file format.
- Preserve data descriptions, file lists, dataset context, and task background unless they explicitly
     reveal the metric.
- Do not make the prompt look corrupted or intentionally vague.
- Do not introduce a new metric or imply a particular metric through replacement wording.

Return the edited task description and metadata in the required JSON format.



LLM verification prompt (objective ambiguity). Used to verify candidate ambiguous-metric
variants on MLE-bench before human review.
You are an expert reviewer for a benchmark on metric ambiguity in ML
competitions. You receive (a) the original Kaggle competition
description (full.md), (b) a redacted version (ambig_metric.md) that
must hide the evaluation metric, and (c) the structured manifest entry
recording the true metric.

Apply the four-item retention checklist from the benchmark paper:

  1. PLAUSIBLE ALTERNATIVES -- given only ambig_metric.md and the data
     package implied by it (column names, sample submission, etc.), at
     least two reasonable evaluation metrics remain consistent with the
     prompt. List them.

  2. AMBIGUITY PRESERVED -- the ambiguous variant does NOT leak the true
     metric anywhere: not in the Evaluation section, not in inline
     mentions ("predict a probability", "minimize ...", explicit metric
     names), and not in the submission-format hints. Cue leaks include
     formula fragments, optimization-direction wording, probability/
     hard-label hints that uniquely identify the metric, and
     metric-specific column semantics. Submission column NAMES are
     allowed to remain (the grader needs them); their METRIC-IDENTIFYING
     SEMANTICS are not.



                                                   29
    3. DECISION RELEVANT -- resolving the ambiguity changes a task-level
       choice a competent solver should make: hard labels vs probabilities,
       optimization direction, threshold/ranking behavior, top-K, clipping,
       column-wise aggregation, or submission semantics.

    4. TASK PRESERVED -- the redaction removes only metric-related
       information. Data descriptions, file lists, column definitions,
       submission column names, timeline, prizes, and citation are kept
       intact (modulo neutralized metric phrasing).

Output STRICT JSON, no markdown fences, no commentary. Schema:

{
    "checks": {
       "plausible_alternatives": {
          "pass": true|false,
          "rationale": "<= 2 sentences",
          "alternatives": ["<metric 1>", "<metric 2>", ...]
       },
       "ambiguity_preserved": {
          "pass": true|false,
          "rationale": "<= 2 sentences",
          "leaked_cues": ["<verbatim quote 1>", ...]
       },
       "decision_relevant": {
          "pass": true|false,
          "rationale": "<= 2 sentences"
       },
       "task_preserved": {
          "pass": true|false,
          "rationale": "<= 2 sentences"
       }
    },
    "verdict": "pass" | "fail",
    "notes": "optional <= 2 sentences"
}

‘verdict‘ is "pass" iff all four checks pass. Be strict on
ambiguity_preserved: any verbatim quote that names or formulaically
identifies the true metric is a leak.




LLM verification prompt (target ambiguity). Used to verify candidate ambiguous-target variants
on DSBench before human review. The checklist is identical in spirit but enumerates an axis-specific
leak surface (target concept names, synonyms, two-target signposting, decoy/manifest references,
leftover semantic feature names, sample-submission mentions, and numeric facts contradicting the
manifest).
You are an expert reviewer for a benchmark on TARGET ambiguity in tabular
ML competitions. You receive (a) the original DSBench task prompt
(full.txt), (b) a rewritten variant (task_ambig.txt) that must hide the
original target column and add a second candidate target so that two
plausible targets coexist on disk, and (c) a manifest entry recording
which column is the true target and the anonymized->original feature
name map.

Apply the four-item retention checklist from the benchmark paper:

    1. PLAUSIBLE ALTERNATIVES -- given only task_ambig.txt and the data
       package implied by it (anonymised features f_01..f_NN, plus two
       candidate target columns val_1 and val_2 in train.csv), at least
       two reasonable target columns remain consistent with the prompt.
       List them.

    2. AMBIGUITY PRESERVED -- the ambiguous variant does NOT leak which
       column is the true target. Cue leaks include:
         * the original target concept name appearing in prose
           (e.g. "count", "price", "label", "target");
         * any synonym uniquely identifying the predicted concept
           (e.g. "rentals per hour", "house value");
         * explicit signposting that two candidate targets exist
           (the prompt must read as a single-target task);
         * mentions of "val_1", "val_2", "decoy", "ambiguous",
           "candidate target", "identify the target";
         * leftover semantic feature names from the manifest’s
           feature_map (the prompt must use only f_01..f_NN);
         * sample_submission.csv being mentioned (it must be absent



                                                      30
              from the Files list);
            * numeric facts (n_train, n_test, n_features) that contradict
              the manifest -- only the manifest values are allowed.

     3. DECISION RELEVANT -- resolving the ambiguity changes a task-level
        choice a competent solver should make: which column is fit, which
        column appears in the submission file, and consequently which
        metric value the evaluator computes. (For target ambiguity this is
        true essentially by construction; rate fail only if the prompt
        somehow makes the choice trivial or moot.)

     4. TASK PRESERVED -- the rewrite removes only target-identifying and
        feature-semantic information. Dataset narrative, evaluation metric
        description, submission-format shape (header order, row ordering,
        id column), and section headers are kept intact (modulo target
        anonymisation and ‘prediction‘ as the generic header column).

 Output STRICT JSON, no markdown fences, no commentary. Schema:

     {
         "checks": {
            "plausible_alternatives": {
               "pass": true|false,
               "rationale": "<= 2 sentences",
               "alternatives": ["<col 1>", "<col 2>", ...]
            },
            "ambiguity_preserved": {
               "pass": true|false,
               "rationale": "<= 2 sentences",
               "leaked_cues": ["<verbatim quote 1>", ...]
            },
            "decision_relevant": {
               "pass": true|false,
               "rationale": "<= 2 sentences"
            },
            "task_preserved": {
               "pass": true|false,
               "rationale": "<= 2 sentences"
            }
         },
         "verdict": "pass" | "fail",
         "notes": "optional <= 2 sentences"
     }

 ‘verdict‘ is "pass" iff all four checks pass. Be strict on
 ambiguity_preserved: any verbatim quote that names the original target
 concept, names an original feature, signposts the two-target setup, or
 contradicts the manifest counts is a leak.



G.4       Framing Diagnostic Annotation Prompt

Objective-framing judge prompt. For objective-ambiguity runs, we use an LLM judge to classify
the agent’s behavior from its code, logs, final response, and submitted predictions. The judge
labels each run as aligned with the intended objective, aligned with a plausible alternative objective,
degenerate, invalid/no-score, or other. We use majority vote over five judge calls, followed by human
verification.
 You read a data-science agent’s full trajectory and final submission, and put it into ONE of five
      buckets describing what the agent did with respect to the competition’s TRUE metric (given in the
      manifest).

 The agent was given an ambiguous prompt that omits or paraphrases the metric. Return STRICT JSON. Quote
      short evidence verbatim from the trajectory.

 SCHEMA (return exactly this JSON, no preamble, no code fences):

 {
     "label":      "Intended" | "FormBroken" | "WrongObjective" | "Abdicated" | "Invalid" | "Other",
     "confidence": <float 0..1>,
     "evidence_quotes": ["<verbatim short snippet>", "..."],
     "rationale": "<<= 2 sentences>"
 }

 BUCKETS (pick exactly one):

 - "Intended": Agent built a real, non-degenerate model or heuristic whose
   optimization target is aligned with the TRUE metric (the same metric, a



                                                             31
  positively monotonic surrogate, or a hand-coded heuristic that approximates
  it), AND the submission file has the correct form (probabilities for
  AUC/log-loss; hard labels for accuracy/F1; text spans for Jaccard; reals for
  RMSE), AND the predictions actually use the input features (not constant or
  just the class marginals).

- "WrongObjective": Agent built a real model but optimized something not
  aligned with the TRUE metric (e.g. trained F1 instead of AUC with no
  monotonic relation; minimized when it should have maximized). Submission has
  real per-row signal but the optimization target is wrong.

- "Abdicated": Submission file exists but is degenerate / not a real model:
  copied ‘data/sample_submission.csv‘ or a provided baseline (e.g.
  ‘randomPredictions.csv‘); every row predicts the same constant or the train
  marginals; trivial dummy like "first 30 chars of the context"; no real
  modeling step. Look for ‘cp data/sample_submission.csv‘ or
  ‘cp .../randomPredictions.csv‘ in the trajectory, or near-identical rows in
  the submission head.

- "Invalid": No usable submission. Either no _submission.csv at all, agent
  timed out before writing one, file is corrupt / unreadable / wrong schema
  the grader rejects, or trajectory is empty.

- "Other": Use ONLY if none of the five buckets above clearly applies (e.g.
  the run is a genuinely ambiguous edge case the schema doesn’t cover). Prefer
  one of the five named buckets whenever possible.

DECISION ORDER (apply top to bottom, stop at first match):
  1. No submission / unreadable / agent timed out with no tools called -> Invalid.
  2. Submission is a copied baseline file, or every row is the same constant,
     or the agent narrates that it copied a baseline -> Abdicated.
  3. Agent trained an aligned objective but submission form contradicts the
     TRUE metric (e.g. AUC task with 0/1 labels) -> FormBroken.
  4. Agent built a real model with a non-aligned optimization target ->
     WrongObjective.
  5. Agent built a real, aligned model with correct submission form -> Intended.
  6. None of the above clearly applies -> Other.




                                                   32
