                                        DeployBench : Benchmarking LLM Agents for
                                        Research Artifact Deployment
                                        Yuanli Wang 1 , Yaoyao Qian2 , Yue Zhang3 , Hanhan Zhou4 , Jindan Huang5 , Tianfu Fu6 , Qiuyang
                                        Mang7 , Huanzhi Mao7 , Wenhao Chai8 , Wendong Fan9 and Liqiang Jing3
                                        1 Boston University, 2 Northeastern University, 3 University of Texas at Dallas, 4 George Washington

                                        University, 5 Tufts University, 6 xAI, 7 University of California, Berkeley, 8 Princeton University,
                                        9 Eigent.Ai

                                        Correspondence: yuanliw@bu.edu




arXiv:2606.05238v1 [cs.SE] 3 Jun 2026
                                        Abstract: LLM agents have made rapid progress on software engineering and ML research tasks,
                                        but these advances often assume access to a working runnable environment. For research artifacts
                                        released alongside published papers, setting up such an environment from a fresh machine remains
                                        a major bottleneck. Existing environment setup benchmarks do not cover the full scope of research-
                                        artifact deployment, which involves multi-language toolchains, system-level dependencies beyond
                                        containers (e.g., GPU/CUDA and kernel configurations), and legacy artifact compatibility. We
                                        introduce DeployBench , a multi-domain benchmark of 51 research-artifact deployment tasks spanning
                                        AI/ML, computer systems, and scientific computing, covering all these dimensions. Each task is
                                        verified by a hidden pipeline that executes the paper’s designated experiment and checks its outputs.
                                        Evaluating four state-of-the-art LLMs with OpenHands yields pass-rates from 7.8%–51.0%. Failures
                                        are dominated by a completion-judgment problem: 97 of 154 are agent-terminated self-stops, where
                                        the agent’s pre-finish checks validate a different or weaker target than the paper-specific task requires.
                                        DeployBench highlights the gap between current agents and autonomous deployment, and offers a
                                        realistic testbed for scientific research agents.

                                        Repository: https://github.com/pentium3/DeployBench


                                        1.   Introduction

                                        Large language model (LLM) agents have expanded beyond text generation into autonomous software
                                        engineering and scientific research, tackling repository-level software engineering tasks [1, 2], repro-
                                        ducing open-source research code [3, 4], and performing ML engineering, data science tasks [5, 6] and
                                        frontier research [7, 8]. However, these evaluations often assume access to a runnable environment
                                        where dependencies, build tools, and runtime stacks are already configured. In practice, research
                                        artifacts are not always released in a runnable state [9], and the effort required to reproduce them
                                        can be substantial [10, 11]. Setting up an artifact from scratch often requires resolving version-drifted
                                        dependencies, aligning GPU/CUDA stacks, patching legacy code against modern toolchains, and
                                        configuring system-level components such as custom Linux kernels that containers cannot host. This
                                        setup phase is often the primary barrier preventing researchers from reproducing, validating, and
                                        building upon published work.
                                        Existing environment-setup benchmarks do not fully test this capability [12–14]. Prior work primarily
                                        evaluates general-purpose repository setup using container builds, static checks, or unit tests as
success signals, or studies research-code deployment within narrower Python-based AI research or
containerized settings. As a result, they do not measure whether agents can deploy diverse research
artifacts from raw infrastructure and run a paper-specific target.
To address this gap, we introduce DeployBench , a benchmark designed to evaluate whether LLM
agents can deploy published research artifacts from raw infrastructure to runnable environments.
DeployBench includes 51 deployment tasks drawn from top-tier venues between 2008 and 2025,
spanning AI/ML (25), computer systems (19), and scientific computing (7). The tasks cover 11
programming-language ecosystems and include 22 GPU-dependent workloads, 5 tasks that compile
and boot custom Linux kernels in virtual machines, and 10 legacy artifacts (2011–2018) requiring
compatibility repair against modern toolchains. Each task provides the agent with the paper, its code
repository, and a fresh cloud VM with no pre-installed drivers. Task success is determined by a hidden
2-layer verifier (a global rule-based parser plus a task-specific check) that runs a lightweight version
of the paper’s designated experiment covering the main pipeline and key dependencies (e.g., training
the model for one epoch), and checks expected outputs and runtime evidence. We also confirm that
all included tasks can be deployed by running the reference setup scripts.
We evaluate 4 state-of-the-art LLMs (GPT-5.3-Codex, Gemini-3.1-Pro, Grok-4.20, GPT-5.4-Mini) on
DeployBench with OpenHands as agent scaffold [15]. The pass rates of these 4 LLMs range from
7.8% to 51.0%. Even the strongest model solves only about half the tasks. Failure analysis reveals five
recurring root-cause patterns, with completion judgment as a dominant problem. Among 154 failures,
97 are agent-terminated self-stops. In these cases, the agent’s own pre-finish checks often run against
a different or weaker target than the paper-specific task requires. This suggests that agents still fall
short both in deploying research artifacts and in deciding whether the resulting setup satisfies the
paper-specific task.


2.   Related Work

LLM agents for software engineering. LLM agents have been applied to a wide range of repository-
level software engineering tasks [5, 6, 16–20]. To perform such tasks, agent scaffolds such as SWE-
agent [2] and OpenHands [15] have emerged, with progress measured on benchmarks such as
SWE-bench [1] and Terminal-Bench [21]. However, before such downstream tasks can be performed,
the repository must first be set up in a runnable environment, which remains a bottleneck due to
version drift and dependencies that span Python packages, system libraries, GPU drivers, etc.


Benchmarks for environment setup. Motivated by this gap, recent benchmarks have begun to
study environment setup and repository deployment directly. Installamatic [22] introduces a bench-
mark of repository installation tasks from open-source Python projects, together with an agent that
searches project documentation to install and verify target repositories. ExecutionAgent [23] generates
project-specific scripts for building arbitrary projects and running their tests. EnvBench [12] evaluates
automated environment setup across Python and JVM repositories, and SetupBench [11] evaluates en-
vironment bootstrapping from Linux sandboxes with deterministic success commands. Repo2Run [24]
introduces an agentic framework and benchmark for building Docker-based executable test envi-
ronments for Python repositories. EnConda-Bench [25] is complementary to these end-to-end setup
benchmarks: it injects realistic README errors and provides process-level trajectory evaluation of

                                                                                                       2
                                                                                                      25
                                                                                                                                        Domain
                                                                                                      20                             AI/ML
                                                                    Clean Linux VM per task                                          Computer Systems
                                                      Task                 Terminal agent                                            Sci. Computing
                                                   instruction                                        15
                                                                         Set up environment   Count
 Paper Artifact                                                                                       10
                               DeployBench                       Output + VM state
 paper + code repo                                                                                     5
                                   Task
                                                    Hidden
     AI/ML                     Task instruction     verifier
                                                                            Verifier script             0
                                                                                                                  t        l       t            R cket
     Computer System           + Hidden verifier
                                                                                                         hon ++ us tran kel ava rip Lua Julia
     Scientific Computing
                                                                          Check on final VM           P t C/C R For Has J avaSc
                                                                                                       y                                        Ra
                                                                                                                             J
                            Figure 1: DeployBench overview.                                   Figure 2: Distribution of tasks across
                                                                                              domains and main languages.


planning, error diagnosis, repair, and final execution. Closer to research deployment, CSR-Bench [13]
evaluates LLM agents on deploying computer science research repositories, with tasks concentrated in
NLP/CV/AI/ML/DM topics, through setup-command generation, data preparation, and experiment
execution. ResearchEnvBench [14], the closest to our setting, benchmarks environment synthesis for
research code, but operates inside Docker containers with CUDA drivers pre-installed, and covers
only recent AI repositories in Python without older codebases or other domains. Beyond benchmarks,
agent systems such as HerAgent [26] and DockSmith [27] treat environment construction as a learning
target, focusing on agentic strategy improvement rather than benchmark scope.
In contrast, DeployBench targets autonomous deployment in more realistic settings: it starts from
a bare metal Linux VM rather than a container, spans multiple research domains beyond AI, and
involves legacy codebases that were written years ago and must now be made to build and run on
modern systems. A task is solved only when the final environment executes a designated paper
experiment.


3.      DeployBench

We introduce DeployBench , a benchmark for evaluating whether LLM agents can construct envi-
ronments that execute designated experiments from published research artifacts, starting from raw
infrastructure. Beyond installing packages, this requires the agent to infer runtime requirements from
the paper and repository, construct the needed software and system stack, repair compatibility issues,
and determine whether the resulting environment is ready for the target experiment.


3.1.     Task Formulation

Given a research paper and its code repository, a DeployBench task asks an agent to turn a clean
cloud VM into an environment in which a designated experiment from the paper executes successfully
(Figure 1). Each task provides the agent with three inputs: the paper, the code repository, and a
minimal Linux VM with no task-specific dependencies pre-installed. We disallow Docker so that
success reflects native dependency resolution and system setup rather than reuse of pre-packaged
containers. This is also necessary for system-level artifacts such as the QEMU/kernel tasks. Task
success is determined by a hidden, task-specific verifier described in Section 3.3.

                                                                                                                                                         3
3.2.   Benchmark Construction

Paper Selection. DeployBench comprises 51 tasks drawn from research artifacts published between
2008 and 2025, spanning AI/ML (25 tasks from venues such as NeurIPS, ICML, ICLR, CVPR, ECCV,
RSS, CoRL), computer systems (19 tasks from OSDI, SOSP, EuroSys, ATC, USENIX Security), and
scientific computing (7 tasks from non-CS scientific domains, including JOSS and Cell artifacts). We
select papers from top venues in each domain and prioritize artifacts with widely used public reposi-
tories. For systems and security tasks, we also prioritize papers that have passed artifact evaluation
[28] when such badges or reports are available. We manually inspect each candidate repository and
attempt to run the artifact ourselves, excluding clearly broken, incomplete, or unreproducible artifacts.
Each DeployBench task is validated by executing a verification target derived from a designated paper
experiment on a fresh VM, rather than by import checks, command success, or repository-provided
tests alone.
Verifier Construction and Reproducibility Check. For each task, we first construct a working
reference deployment on a clean VM to confirm that the artifact can be reproduced and to understand
its dependencies and execution workflow. This step is used to validate task feasibility and verifier
design. We then select a verification target from the paper’s original evaluation that is lightweight
enough to run within a practical time budget but substantial enough to cover the main pipeline and
its key dependencies (for example, training the model for one epoch). The task-specific verifier and
reference setup script are manually constructed for each task. The verifier re-runs the target in the
final agent-produced environment and checks the output against task-specific success conditions. As
a reliability check, the reference setup script reproduces the environment from scratch and passes the
verifier on all 51 tasks. Per-task agent time budgets are set individually based on setup complexity
and command execution time, ranging from 10 to 60 minutes. We exclude candidates that cannot be
reproduced during reference construction, such as those with unavailable datasets or model weights.
Task Composition and Complexity. Across the 51 tasks, implementation languages span 11 ecosys-
tems (Python, C/C++, Rust, Fortran, Julia, R, Haskell, Lua, Racket, JavaScript, Java), with several
tasks combining multiple languages in a single build pipeline. The final set also spans a wide range
of setup difficulty: 12 tasks are labeled easy, 20 medium, and 19 hard. These labels are assigned by
three authors with graduate-level CS research experience who constructed the reference deployments,
based on dependency layers, GPU/CUDA or QEMU/kernel setup, legacy compatibility repair, and
debugging required during reference construction. Deployment requirements vary along multiple
axes: 22 tasks require GPU execution while 29 are CPU-only, 5 require building a custom Linux kernel
and booting it inside a QEMU virtual machine, and 10 are legacy artifacts released between 2011 and
2018 (not updated since 2020) that require compatibility repair against modern OS versions, compilers,
and library APIs. Many tasks also include runtime-consuming setup steps that affect the deployment
budget, such as compiling large codebases from source, downloading required weights or datasets to
expected paths, or patching legacy APIs. Figure 2 summarizes the distribution across domains and
main languages.


3.3.   Evaluation

After the agent finishes, reaches the step limit, or times out, we evaluate the final VM state using a
hidden task-specific verifier. The verifier has two layers (Figure 3) that check different failure cases.


                                                                                                       4
                                                                                                                       yes
                                                                                      Generic failure
                                                                                                                              Failed
                                                                                         found?
        Hidden Verifier                                                                          no
                                           Layer1: Global parser
                                verifier                                                                               Diagnostic judge
                                 logs
                                                   Identify task-agnostic     Layer2: Task-specific check
                                                      failure patterns
                                                                                         Validate target completion
                                            •   Dependency errors                                   status
                                            •   Runtime exceptions              •   Expected output
       Run target experiments               •   Crash / out of memory           •   runtime evidence                   Diagnose & Summarize
             on final VM                    •   …                               •   ..                                      root causes


                                                                        yes                Check                      no
                                                   Success                                                                    Failed
                                                                                          passed?

                                                     Figure 3: Evaluation pipeline.


Layer 1 is a global rule-based log parser that catches common execution failures shared across tasks,
such as missing dependencies, compilation errors, runtime crashes, and out-of-memory errors. If no
Layer-1 failure is detected, Layer 2 runs task-specific checks for expected outputs, runtime evidence,
generated artifacts, or service availability. Beyond Layer 1’s generic failure checks, this second layer
verifies whether the paper-specific target actually produces the required outputs or runtime evidence,
rather than merely reaching a superficially runnable state. A task is solved only if it passes both layers.
For failed tasks, we additionally run a separate LLM-based diagnostic agent over the final VM state
and verifier outputs to attribute the root cause (full prompt in Appendix A3). This diagnostic step
is used only for failure attribution. All success rates are computed solely from deterministic verifier
outcomes.


3.4.   Comparison with Existing Benchmarks

Table 1 positions DeployBench against recent benchmarks for repository setup and environment
synthesis along four axes: (1) multiple language ecosystems per task (Multi-Lang.), (2) per-task specific
validation beyond generic success signals (imports, command success, builds, or repository-provided
unit tests) (Per-Task Verifier), (3) host/VM-level setup beyond containers such as GPU/CUDA driver
install, kernel builds, or QEMU execution (System-Level Setup), and (4) older artifacts requiring
compatibility repair (Legacy Compat.). Among benchmarks with task-specific validation, Deploy-
Bench uses a verifier that executes a lightweight target derived from a designated paper experiment
on the final fresh-VM environment. ResearchEnvBench [14] shares per-task verification and tests
CUDA-stack alignment within Docker containers, but is restricted to AI repositories in Python with
drivers pre-installed and excludes legacy artifacts. EnvBench [12] covers only two language ecosys-
tems (Python and Java). EnConda-Bench [25] and CSR-Bench [13] verify only via generic signals
(Docker build , repository-provided unit tests , or generic command-execution signals) rather than
task-specific validation. In contrast, DeployBench is the only benchmark combining all four axes.




                                                                                                                                              5
                                                                         Per-Task System-Level Legacy
Benchmark                      Task Source                 Multi-Lang.
                                                                         Verifier    Setup     Compat.
EnvBench [12]           Python + Java OSS repos                ✓           ✗          ✗          ✗
SetupBench [11]         OSS repos                              ✓           ✓          ✗          ✗
Installamatic [22]      Python OSS repos                       ✗           ✗          ✗          ✗
ExecutionAgent [23]     OSS repos                              ✓           ✗          ✗          ✗
Repo2Run [24]           Python OSS repos                       ✗           ✗          ✗          ✗
EnConda-Bench [25]      Python OSS repos + README errors       ✗           ✗          ✗          ✗
ResearchEnvBench [14]   AI research code repos                 ✗           ✓          ✓          ✗
CSR-Bench [13]          AI research code repos                 ✗           ✗          ✗          ✗
DeployBench (Ours)      Multi-domain papers + code repos       ✓           ✓          ✓          ✓

Table 1: Comparison of DeployBench with existing environment-setup benchmarks. ✓ , ✓ , and ✗ denote
full, partial, and no support along each axis.


4.       Experiment

4.1.     Experimental Setup

Models. We evaluate four frontier language models under OpenHands agent scaffold: OpenAI
GPT-5.3-Codex, OpenAI GPT-5.4-Mini, Google Gemini-3.1-Pro, and xAI Grok-4.20. For the diagnostic
agent on failed runs, we use the Codex CLI tool (an OpenAI command-line agent based on GPT-5.3,
high-reasoning mode) with SSH access to the final VM state and verifier logs. Prompting. The
same system prompt instructs the agent to set up the artifact natively on a fresh Linux VM (Docker
disallowed), run a simple test, and write a RUNBOOK.MD file summarizing the setup process. The full
prompt is in Appendix A2. Execution environment. All runs use OpenHands [15] on a fresh Google
Cloud VM running Ubuntu 22.04 (16 vCPUs, 64 GB RAM). GPU tasks use a VM with one NVIDIA L4
GPU (24 GB memory) and no pre-installed CUDA drivers. Each task uses a fresh VM, a task-specific
time budget, and a fixed verification budget. The agent never sees the hidden verifier scripts. Metric.
Our primary metric is task success rate, the fraction of tasks whose verification pipeline returns a
passing verdict.


4.2.     Model Performance

4.2.1.    Overall Results

Table 2 reports the aggregate task success rates of all evaluated models on DeployBench : GPT-5.3-
Codex leads at 51.0%, followed by Gemini-3.1-Pro (27.5%), Grok-4.20 (11.8%), and GPT-5.4-Mini (7.8%).
Even the strongest model solves only about half of the tasks, showing that end-to-end research artifact
deployment remains a challenging task. The gap between models indicates that DeployBench can
distinguish the capabilities of the model under the same agent scaffold.




                                                                                                         6
  Breakdown        Group              # Tasks      GPT-5.3-Codex     Gemini-3.1-Pro   Grok-4.20   GPT-5.4-Mini
  Overall          All tasks                51              51.0%             27.5%       11.8%           7.8%
                   AI/ML                    25              52.0%             16.0%        8.0%           0.0%
  Category         Sci. Computing            7              42.9%             57.1%       14.3%           0.0%
                   Systems                  19              52.6%             31.6%       15.8%          21.1%
                   Easy                     12              66.7%             33.3%       25.0%           8.3%
  Difficulty       Medium                   20              45.0%             40.0%        5.0%          10.0%
                   Hard                     19              47.4%             10.5%       10.5%           5.3%
   Repository      Legacy (<2020)           10              40.0%             20.0%       10.0%           0.0%
      age          Recent (≥2020)           41              53.7%             29.3%       12.2%           9.8%
   Table 2: Task success rates by overall performance, task category, artifact difficulty, and repository age.


4.2.2.    Results by Task Category

Table 2 also breaks performance down by task category, difficulty, and repository age. The differences
between categories are mainly due to their deployment requirements. In AI/ML, 88.0% of tasks
require GPU-capable environments, making CUDA/GPU setup a major source of category-specific
difficulty. In systems, the five QEMU/kernel tasks have an average success rate of only 20.0%, showing
that VM- and kernel-level execution adds another source of deployment difficulty. Difficulty labels
match the overall success pattern: at least one model solves 83.3% of easy tasks, compared with 55.0%
of medium tasks and 52.6% of hard tasks. Comparing legacy and recent tasks, since they run on the
same modern OS image and hardware, this gap reflects compatibility drift rather than paper age itself:
compatibility repair is needed in 5 of 10 legacy tasks versus 3 of 41 recent tasks, often because older
code must be adapted to modern compilers and library APIs. Section 5.4 gives a concrete example.


4.2.3.    Token Usage and Runtime Analysis


                                                     Tokens (avg per task)            Runtime (minutes, avg per task)
Model               Success rate Steps     Total    Input Output Solved Failed Total Solved                      Failed
GPT-5.3-Codex              51.0%    44.5   2.15M    2.12M    30.7K    1.63M   2.69M   18.1     14.6                21.8
Gemini-3.1-Pro             27.5%    57.8   2.55M    2.54M     4.3K    1.49M   2.94M   15.9     10.1                18.1
Grok-4.20                  11.8%    15.2   0.75M    0.75M     4.1K    0.42M   0.80M   14.0     11.5                14.3
GPT-5.4-Mini                7.8%    21.7   0.65M    0.64M     3.6K    0.45M   0.66M    6.1     10.2                 5.8
         Table 3: Per-task token usage and runtime split by model and verifier outcome (Solved / Failed).

Table 3 reports per-model token usage and runtime. Token usage does not align with success ranking:
Gemini-3.1-Pro consumes the most tokens (2.55M on average) yet ranks second in success, while
GPT-5.4-Mini uses the fewest tokens (0.65M) and has the lowest success rate. Within every model,
failed runs use more tokens than solved runs (Codex 2.69M vs 1.63M, Gemini 2.94M vs 1.49M, Grok
0.80M vs 0.42M, Mini 0.66M vs 0.45M), consistent with the higher Loop-style retry rate on failed runs
(60.3% vs 44.3%, Section 5.2). Runtime follows the same per-model pattern except for GPT-5.4-Mini,
which fails faster than it succeeds (5.8 min vs 10.2 min) because most of its failures are early self-stops.


                                                                                                                  7
5.     Further Analysis

To inform future agent design, we analyze the deployment-specific failure modes and trajectory
patterns of the four evaluated models, drawing on verifier outputs, global-parser error types, and the
diagnostic-agent reports described in Section 3.3.


5.1.   Failure Analysis

Table 4 categorizes the 154 failed runs by where they are caught. The global check (Layer 1) detects
46.1% of runs.
The remaining 53.9% pass the global check but still fail the task-specific verifier (Layer 2), meaning
the environment reaches a superficially runnable state but does not produce the artifacts, services,
outputs, or runtime evidence required by the designated experiment.

                           Failure location               Count    Percentage
                           Layer 1 – Runtime crash            39         25.3%
                           Layer 1 – Dependency error         27         17.5%
                           Layer 1 – Compilation error         5          3.2%
                           Layer 1: global check              71         46.1%
                           Layer 2: task-specific check       83         53.9%
                          Table 4: Failure locations in the evaluation pipeline.

From the diagnostic-agent reports, failures cluster into 5 recurring root-cause patterns: dependency
and package resolution (incomplete or version-incompatible installs), GPU/CUDA setup (CPU-only
frameworks, missing drivers, mismatched CUDA-dependent libraries), native-build and toolchain (failed
compilation of non-Python components), artifact and output mismatch (expected binaries, checkpoints,
datasets, or outputs missing or misplaced), and system- and VM-level execution (QEMU, kernel boot,
service startup, or non-interactive configuration failures). The 20 all-fail tasks (failed by all four
models) typically combine multiple of these patterns: all 20 hit at least two and 14 hit three or more
(3.4 patterns per task on average). The 30 mixed-outcome tasks (at least one model succeeded and
at least one failed) average only 2.5 patterns per task, indicating that all-fail tasks compound more
failure modes simultaneously. For example, gan neurips14 gpu combines a wrong Theano version,
an absent CUDA toolkit (nvcc and cuDNN missing), and a stale pylearn2 commit. kflex sosp24
combines an incomplete QEMU rootfs (missing libbenchmark, libjemalloc, and libabsl shared
objects) with a wrong system base. Appendix A4 reports the full counts for each failure pattern. These
results show that per-task verification is necessary: generic Layer 1 checks would miss the 53.9% of
failures caught only by the task-specific verifier.


5.2.   Trajectory Analysis

We use trajectory analysis to identify which process signals are useful for agent design. Overall,
trajectory length is a weak success signal, while how models use the agent scaffold and how they
recover from errors provide more useful signals.

                                                                                                    8
Trajectory length and phase coverage. Table 5 reports per-task average trajectory length under
three units: agent steps, shell commands, and sub-commands (segments of a shell command split on
top-level &&, ||, or ; which expose work hidden inside chained commands. see Appendix A5). Longer
trajectories do not imply better deployment. Gemini-3.1-Pro produces the longest trajectories (57.8
steps, 55.3 commands) but underperforms GPT-5.3-Codex, which uses fewer steps (44.5). Grok-4.20
issues only 10.4 commands on average, but these expand to 115.3 sub-command segments because it
chains many operations inside each shell command. Thus, trajectory length is useful for understanding
how an agent works, but it does not predict whether the task will succeed.
We also classify sub-commands into deployment phases using heuristic keyword parsing (definitions
in Appendix A5). Failed runs do not skip entire stages. Instead, compared with successful runs, they
spend less time on environment inspection and more time in repeated install/build retries, suggesting
that phase coverage alone is not enough to explain deployment success. The full phase breakdown is
in Appendix A5.

                                                                Sub-   Success
                           Model             Steps    Cmds.    cmds.    Rate
                           GPT-5.3-Codex       44.5     37.2   178.7     51.0%
                           GPT-5.4-Mini        21.7     19.9    75.3      7.8%
                           Gemini-3.1-Pro      57.8     55.3    84.5     27.5%
                           Grok-4.20           15.2     10.4   115.3     11.8%
                           Table 5: Per-task average trajectory length by model.



Model-specific workflow and tool-use patterns. The models follow different workflow styles. GPT-
5.3-Codex follows a more plan-driven workflow, while Gemini-3.1-Pro produces longer Bash-heavy
trajectories. GPT-5.4-Mini often self-stops with partial runbooks, and Grok-4.20 more often aborts
after failed commands. In terms of tool-use patterns, one concrete difference is command-timeout use:
GPT-5.3-Codex sets the OpenHands bash tool’s optional timeout parameter on 100% of bash calls,
while Gemini-3.1-Pro sets it on only 2%. This difference explains why Gemini-3.1-Pro has many more
soft-timeout events, where the shell tool stops waiting before the command completes. These events
make its trajectories look longer without reflecting additional deployment work. Therefore, part of
the trajectory-length gap reflects how models use the agent scaffold, not only how much deployment
work they perform. We do not claim that setting timeouts would directly improve success rates, but
future agents should make agent tool-use policies explicit. Details are discussed in Appendices A6.


Recovery after failed commands. Failed shell commands (non-zero exit or OpenHands soft-timeout)
appear in both successful and failed runs. However, what differs is how the agent responds. Using
keyword and regex heuristics, we assign each failed command one of five recovery categories: Inspect
(read logs/files), Adapt (change the command before retrying), Loop, Abort/Finish, or Other (full defini-
tions in Appendix A7). Successful runs more often inspect logs or adapt the command (Inspect+Adapt:
48.5% vs. 32.7% in failed runs), while failed runs more often repeat waiting or retry loops (60.3%
vs. 44.3% in successful runs; Table 6). Because OpenHands soft-timeouts are also counted as Loop,
especially for Gemini-3.1-Pro, this category captures unresolved waiting or retry behavior rather than
only explicit repeated retries. This suggests a concrete target for future agents: better log reading,
dependency tracking, and retry decisions, rather than simply larger time or step budgets.

                                                                                                       9
               Outcome     Failed Cmds.    Inspect    Adapt   Loop      Abort/Finish   Other
               Success               332    26.2%     22.3%   44.3%             4.8%   2.4%
               Failed              2,102    19.0%     13.7%   60.3%             6.0%   1.0%
                            Table 6: Recovery behavior after failed commands.


5.3.   Completion Judgment

                     Self-stop   RUNBOOK-success       RUNBOOK-partial        Meaningful   Shallow-only
   Model              failures       failures             failures              check         check
   GPT-5.3-Codex         12/25                12/12                    0/12       12/12            0/12
   GPT-5.4-Mini          42/47                17/42                   20/42       33/42            9/42
   Gemini-3.1-Pro        15/37                15/15                    0/15       15/15            0/15
   Grok-4.20             28/45                11/28                   12/28       21/28            7/28
Table 7: Self-stop incidence over all failed runs, with RUNBOOK status and pre-finish check types over self-
stops.

Self-stop is the most common termination mode among failed runs: 97 of 154 failures are agent-
terminated rather than reaching timeout or max-step. GPT-5.4-Mini (42/47) and Grok-4.20 (28/45)
show the highest self-stop rates among the four models (Table 7).
Within these 97 self-stopped failures, we find two types of completion-judgment errors. First, at
the RUNBOOK self-report level, 87 of 97 self-stops show RUNBOOK/verifier mismatch: 55 report
SUCCESS while failing verification (RUNBOOK-success), and 32 report PARTIAL while still failing
verification (RUNBOOK-partial). Only 1 of 33 self-stops with PARTIAL reports ultimately passes
verification. Second, at the pre-finish check level, the check that the agent runs before finishing is
often inadequate. All 12 of GPT-5.3-Codex’s and all 15 of Gemini-3.1-Pro’s self-stopped failures do
run a meaningful check (a target script, binary, or training/inference command on the artifact), but
still fail verification because the agent validates the wrong target, runs a check that is weaker than
the verifier, or misses task-specific requirements. We call this self-validation drift. GPT-5.4-Mini (9/42)
and Grok-4.20 (7/28) additionally show a subset of cases where the pre-finish check is shallow only
(imports, --help, toy examples, or RUNBOOK-only writes), never exercising the real artifact.
Future deployment agents need to derive a verifier-like completion check from the paper and repos-
itory: a lightweight run that covers the paper-specific target and key dependencies. Self-designed
smoke tests and RUNBOOK self-assessment are not reliable substitutes.


5.4.   Case Studies

We present two representative cases: adalora iclr23 shows completion-judgment error. silt sosp11
shows legacy compatibility repair requiring writing new compatibility code.




                                                                                                          10
adalora iclr23 (with GPT-5.3-Codex)

Agent behavior. The agent inspects the AdaLoRA repository and paper, creates a Python environment,
installs a CUDA PyTorch stack and the local loralib package, and writes a custom smoke test around
a toy SVDLinear model. The smoke test passes, after which the agent writes RUNBOOK = SUCCESS
and self-stops. However, this smoke test exercises only loralib and does not require the HuggingFace
evaluation stack used by the paper’s experiment. Root cause. The hidden verifier instead runs the
paper’s actual experiment through run glue.py: fine-tuning DeBERTa-v3-base on GLUE CoLA for
a few steps with AdaLoRA’s SVD-based LoRA modules. This requires the HuggingFace stack to be
present in the environment, which the agent’s toy-model smoke test never installed. The Layer 2
check aborts with error ModuleNotFoundError: huggingface hub. Takeaway. The agent’s smoke
test checked only loralib rather than the lightweight paper-specific target used by the verifier. This
illustrates self-validation drift.


silt sosp11 (with GPT-5.4-Mini)

Agent behavior. The agent inspects the SILT repository (an in-memory key-value store system built
by the paper), installs build dependencies, and starts the build. Compilation fails on several legacy
APIs, including old OpenSSL calls, removed TBB atomic types, and a private libc header. The agent
patches the easy parts, such as include paths and simple type substitutions, but cannot solve the
deeper TBB API gap. Finally, the agent self-stops with RUNBOOK = PARTIAL. Root cause. A working
deployment requires writing new compatibility code that wraps SILT’s legacy TBB atomic API onto
modern std::atomic, not just substituting types or includes. GPT-5.3-Codex succeeded by writing a
52-line fawnds/tbb/atomic.h shim and modifying eight other source files, and the resulting binary
built and passed verification. GPT-5.4-Mini’s text-level substitution did not provide this wrapper,
and the agent stopped and honestly reported PARTIAL, rather than overclaiming success. Takeaway.
Legacy artifact deployment requires not just recognizing compatibility breakage but repairing it across
the full dependency stack, sometimes by writing new code (the TBB compatibility shim) rather than only
editing existing source. Benchmarks restricted to actively-maintained repositories cannot cover this
category (Table 1).


6.   Conclusion

We present DeployBench , a benchmark that evaluates whether LLM agents can deploy published
research artifacts from raw infrastructure to a runnable state. Across four frontier models, pass rates
range from 7.8% to 51.0%. Failure analysis reveals a dominant completion-judgment problem: 97 of
154 failures are agent-terminated self-stops. These results point to three missing capabilities for agents:
dependency repair, system-level setup, and strong completion checks.




                                                                                                        11
References

[1] Carlos E. Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and Karthik
    Narasimhan. SWE-bench: Can language models resolve real-world GitHub issues? In Interna-
    tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.

[2] John Yang, Carlos E. Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan,
    and Ofir Press. SWE-agent: Agent-computer interfaces enable automated software engineering.
    ArXiv, abs/2405.15793, 2024.

[3] Giulio Starace, Oliver Jaffe, Dane Sherburn, James Aung, Jun Shern Chan, Leon Maksin, Rachel
    Dias, Evan Mays, Benjamin Kinsella, Wyatt Thompson, Johannes Heidecke, Amelia Glaese,
    and Tejal Patwardhan. Paperbench: Evaluating ai’s ability to replicate ai research. ArXiv,
    abs/2504.01848, 2025.

[4] Shuo Yan, Ruochen Li, Ziming Luo, Zimu Wang, Daoyang Li, Liqiang Jing, Kaiyu He, Peilin
    Wu, George Michalopoulos, Yue Zhang, Ziyang Zhang, Mian Zhang, Zhiyu Chen, and Xinya
    Du. Lmr-bench: Evaluating llm agent’s ability on reproducing language modeling research. In
    Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP).
    Association for Computational Linguistics, 2025.

[5] Jun Shern Chan, Neil Chowdhury, Oliver Jaffe, James Aung, Dane Sherburn, Evan Mays, Giulio
    Starace, Kevin Liu, Leon Maksin, Tejal Patwardhan, Aleksander Madry, and Lilian Weng. MLE-
    bench: Evaluating machine learning agents on machine learning engineering. In International
    Conference on Learning Representations, 2025.

[6] Liqiang Jing, Zhehui Huang, Xiaoyang Wang, Wenlin Yao, Wenhao Yu, Kaixin Ma, Hongming
    Zhang, Xinya Du, and Dong Yu. DSBench: How far are data science agents from becoming data
    science experts? In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025.

[7] Bohan Lyu, Yucheng Yang, Siqiao Huang, Jiaru Zhang, Qixin Xu, Xinghan Li, Xinyang Han,
    Yicheng Zhang, Huaqing Zhang, Runhan Huang, Kaicheng Yang, Zitao Chen, Wentao Guo,
    Junlin Yang, Xinyue Ai, Wenhao Chai, Yadi Cao, Ziran Yang, Kun Wang, Dapeng Jiang, Huan ang
    Gao, Shange Tang, Chengshuai Shi, Simon S. Du, Max Simchowitz, Jiantao Jiao, Dawn Song, and
    Chi Jin. Mls-bench: A holistic and rigorous assessment of ai systems on building better ai, 2026.

[8] Qiuyang Mang, Wenhao Chai, Zhifei Li, Huanzhi Mao, Shang Zhou, Alexander Du, Hanchen Li,
    Shu Liu, Edwin Chen, Yichuan Wang, Xieting Chu, Zerui Cheng, Yuan Xu, Tian Xia, Zirui Wang,
    Tianneng Shi, Jianzhu Yao, Yilong Zhao, Qizheng Zhang, Charlie Ruan, Zeyu Shen, Kaiyuan Liu,
    Runyuan He, Dong Xing, Zerui Li, Zirong Zeng, Yige Jiang, Lufeng Cheng, Ziyi Zhao, Youran Sun,
    Wesley Zheng, Meiyuwang Zhang, Ruyi Ji, Xuechang Tu, Zihan Zheng, Zexing Chen, Kangyang
    Zhou, Zhaozi Wang, Jingbang Chen, Aleksandra Korolova, Peter Henderson, Pramod Viswanath,
    Vijay Ganesh, Saining Xie, Zhuang Liu, Dawn Song, Sewon Min, Ion Stoica, Joseph E. Gonzalez,
    Jingbo Shang, and Alvin Cheung. Frontiercs: Evolving challenges for evolving intelligence, 2025.

[9] Marcos Nazario, Rodrigo Bonifacio, and Gustavo Pinto. Mitigating configuration differences
    between development and production environments: A catalog of strategies, 2025.



                                                                                                  12
[10] Yanzhou Mu, Rong Wang, Juan Zhai, Chunrong Fang, Xiang Chen, Jiacong Wu, An Guo, Jiawei
     Shen, Bingzhuo Li, and Zhenyu Chen. Understanding llm-centric challenges for deep learning
     frameworks: An empirical analysis, 2025.

[11] Avi Arora, Jinu Jang, and Roshanak Zilouchian Moghaddam. SetupBench: Assessing software
     engineering agents’ ability to bootstrap development environments. ArXiv, abs/2507.09063, 2025.

[12] Aleksandra Eliseeva, Alexander Kovrigin, Ilia Kholkin, Egor Bogomolov, and Yaroslav Zharov.
     EnvBench: A benchmark for automated environment setup. ArXiv, abs/2503.14443, 2025.

[13] Yijia Xiao, Runhui Wang, Luyang Kong, Davor Golac, and Wei Wang. CSR-Bench: Benchmarking
     LLM agents in deployment of computer science research repositories. In Proceedings of the 2025
     Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
     Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 12705–12723, 2025.

[14] Yubang Wang, Chenxi Zhang, Bowen Chen, Zezheng Huai, Zihao Dai, Xinchi Chen, Yuxin Wang,
     Yining Zheng, Jingjing Gong, and Xipeng Qiu. ResearchEnvBench: Benchmarking agents on
     environment synthesis for research code execution. ArXiv, abs/2603.06739, 2026.

[15] Xingyao Wang, Boxuan Li, Yufan Song, Frank F. Xu, Xiangru Tang, Mingchen Zhuge, Jiayi Pan,
     Yueqi Song, Bowen Li, Jaskirat Singh, Hoang Tran, Fuqiang Li, Ren Ma, Mingzhang Zheng,
     Bill Qian, Daniel Shao, Niklas Muennighoff, Yizhe Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Junyang Lin, Robert
     Brennan, Hao Peng, Heng Ji, and Graham Neubig. OpenHands: An open platform for AI
     software developers as generalist agents. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
     2025.

[16] Qinyu Luo, Yining Ye, Shihao Liang, Zhong Zhang, Yujia Qin, Yaxi Lu, Yesai Wu, Xin Cong,
     Yankai Lin, Yingli Zhang, Xiaoyin Che, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. RepoAgent: An
     LLM-powered open-source framework for repository-level code documentation generation. In
     Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: System
     Demonstrations, pages 436–464, 2024.

[17] Jialiang Chen, Kaifa Zhao, Jie Liu, Chao Peng, Jierui Liu, Hang Zhu, Pengfei Gao, Ping Yang,
     and Shuiguang Deng. CoReQA: Uncovering potentials of language models in code repository
     question answering. ArXiv, abs/2501.03447, 2025.

[18] Weihan Peng, Yuling Shi, Yuhang Wang, Xinyun Zhang, Beijun Shen, and Xiaodong Gu. SWE-QA:
     Can language models answer repository-level code questions? ArXiv, abs/2509.14635, 2025.

[19] Zeyu Leo Liu, Shrey Pandit, Xi Ye, Eunsol Choi, and Greg Durrett. CodeUpdateArena: Bench-
     marking knowledge editing on API updates. ArXiv, abs/2407.06249, 2024.

[20] Alexander Zhang, Marcus Dong, Jiaheng Liu, Wei Zhang, Yejie Wang, Jian Yang, Ge Zhang,
     Tianyu Liu, Zhongyuan Peng, Yingshui Tan, Yuanxing Zhang, Zhexu Wang, Weixun Wang,
     Yancheng He, Ken Deng, Wangchunshu Zhou, Wenhao Huang, and Zhaoxiang Zhang. CodeCrit-
     icBench: A holistic code critique benchmark for large language models. ArXiv, abs/2502.16614,
     2025.

[21] Mike A. Merrill, Alexander G. Shaw, Nicholas Carlini, Boxuan Li, Harsh Raj, Ivan Bercovich,
     Lin Shi, Jeong Yeon Shin, Thomas Walshe, E. Kelly Buchanan, Junhong Shen, Guanghao Ye,

                                                                                                     13
    Haowei Lin, Jason Poulos, Maoyu Wang, Marianna Nezhurina, Jenia Jitsev, Di Lu, Orfeas Menis
    Mastromichalakis, Zhiwei Xu, Zizhao Chen, Yue Liu, Robert Zhang, Leon Liangyu Chen, Anurag
    Kashyap, Jan-Lucas Uslu, Jeffrey Li, Jianbo Wu, Minghao Yan, Song Bian, Vedang Sharma, Ke Sun,
    Steven Dillmann, Akshay Anand, Andrew Lanpouthakoun, Bardia Koopah, Changran Hu, Etash
    Guha, Gabriel H. S. Dreiman, Jiacheng Zhu, Karl Krauth, Li Zhong, Niklas Muennighoff, Robert
    Amanfu, Shangyin Tan, Shreyas Pimpalgaonkar, Tushar Aggarwal, Xiangning Lin, Xin Lan,
    Xuandong Zhao, Yiqing Liang, Yuanli Wang, Zilong Wang, Changzhi Zhou, David Heineman,
    Hange Liu, Harsh Trivedi, John Yang, Junhong Lin, Manish Shetty, Michael Yang, Nabil Omi,
    Negin Raoof, Shanda Li, Terry Yue Zhuo, Wuwei Lin, Yiwei Dai, Yuxin Wang, Wenhao Chai,
    Shang Zhou, Dariush Wahdany, Ziyu She, Jiaming Hu, Zhikang Dong, Yuxuan Zhu, Sasha Cui,
    Ahson Saiyed, Arinbjörn Kolbeinsson, Jesse Hu, Christopher Michael Rytting, Ryan Marten, Yixin
    Wang, Alex Dimakis, Andy Konwinski, and Ludwig Schmidt. Terminal-bench: Benchmarking
    agents on hard, realistic tasks in command line interfaces, 2026.

[22] Louis Milliken, Sungmin Kang, and Shin Yoo. Beyond pip install: Evaluating LLM agents for
     the automated installation of Python projects. In 2025 IEEE International Conference on Software
     Analysis, Evolution and Reengineering (SANER), pages 1–11, 2025.

[23] Islem Bouzenia and Michael Pradel. You name it, i run it: An LLM agent to execute tests of
     arbitrary projects. Proceedings of the ACM on Software Engineering, 2(ISSTA):1054–1076, 2025.

[24] Ruida Hu, Chao Peng, Xinchen Wang, Junjielong Xu, and Cuiyun Gao. Repo2Run: Automated
     building executable environment for code repository at scale. In Advances in Neural Information
     Processing Systems, 2025.

[25] Jiayi Kuang, Yinghui Li, Xin Zhang, Yangning Li, Di Yin, Xing Sun, Ying Shen, and Philip S. Yu.
     Process-level trajectory evaluation for environment configuration in software engineering agents.
     In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2026.

[26] Xiang Li, Siyu Lu, Federica Sarro, Claire Le Goues, and He Ye. HerAgent: Rethinking the
     automated environment deployment via hierarchical test pyramid. ArXiv, abs/2602.07871, 2026.

[27] Jiaran Zhang, Luck Ma, Fanqi Wan, Di Qi, Xu Zhao, Jieyi Hou, Zhe Xie, Mengqiang Ren, Xin Wu,
     Zhewei Huang, Liangyu Chen, Qi Han, and Xiangyu Zhang. DockSmith: Scaling reliable coding
     environments via an agentic docker builder. ArXiv, abs/2602.00592, 2026.

[28] Systems Research Artifacts. Systems Research Artifacts. https://sysartifacts.github.io/,
     2026. Last accessed: May 2026.




                                                                                                   14
                                            Appendix

The appendix is structured as follows:

   • Full list of benchmark source artifacts (Section A1).
   • The full agent system prompt used in all runs (Section A2).
   • The full diagnostic-agent prompt used to diagnose failed runs (Section A3).
   • Failure pattern counts across all-fail and mixed-outcome tasks (Section A4).
   • Additional trajectory phase definitions and outcome-level phase distributions (Section A5).
   • Additional model-specific trajectory signal definitions and metrics (Section A6).
   • Additional failed-command recovery definitions and distributions (Section A7).
   • Additional stopping behavior statistics by stop type (Section A8).




                                                                                                   15
A1.    List of Benchmark Source Artifacts

Table A1 lists every task in DeployBench by source artifact , venue and source year, grouped by the
three domains used in Section 3.2. Two source artifacts (Generative Adversarial Nets and Model-
Agnostic Meta-Learning) each contribute two task variants, one CPU-only and one GPU-enabled,
so the 51 tasks are drawn from 49 unique source artifacts. DeployBench uses these public source
artifacts for research evaluation of deployment agents by running lightweight targets derived from
the corresponding paper experiments. The benchmark release provides task metadata and our
setup/verifier scripts, and does not redistribute third-party repositories, datasets, or model weights.

         Table A1: Full list of source artifacts in DeployBench (51 tasks across 49 unique artifacts).
 Source Artifact / Paper Title                                                          Venue / Source Year
 AI/ML (25 tasks)
 AdaLoRA: Adaptive Budget Allocation for Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning                ICLR 2023
 ImageNet Classification with Deep Convolutional Neural Networks                        NeurIPS 2012
 BERTScore: Evaluating Text Generation with BERT                                        ICLR 2020
 Counterfactual Reasoning for Out-of-distribution Multimodal Sentiment Analysis         ACM MM 2022
 Deep Mutual Learning                                                                   CVPR 2018
 ERGO: Event Relational Graph Transformer for Document-level Event Causality            COLING 2022
 Identification
 Generative Adversarial Nets (CPU variant)                                              NeurIPS 2014
 Generative Adversarial Nets (GPU variant)                                              NeurIPS 2014
 Grounding DINO: Marrying DINO with Grounded Pre-Training for Open-Set Object           ECCV 2024
 Detection
 Hyena Hierarchy: Towards Larger Convolutional Language Models                          ICML 2023
 High-Resolution Image Synthesis with Latent Diffusion Models                           CVPR 2022
 LightGCN: Simplifying and Powering Graph Convolution Network for Recommen-             SIGIR 2020
 dation
 Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning for Fast Adaptation of Deep Networks (CPU vari-           ICML 2017
 ant)
 Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning for Fast Adaptation of Deep Networks (GPU vari-           ICML 2017
 ant)
 MixText: Linguistically-Informed Interpolation of Hidden Space for Semi-               ACL 2020
 Supervised Text Classification
 MMSegmentation: OpenMMLab Semantic Segmentation Toolbox and Benchmark                  GitHub release, 2024
 A Neural Algorithm of Artistic Style                                                   CVPR 2016
 Pixel Reasoner: Incentivizing Pixel-Space Reasoning with Curiosity-Driven Rein-        NeurIPS 2025
 forcement Learning
 PointNet++: Deep Hierarchical Feature Learning on Point Sets in a Metric Space         NeurIPS 2017
 QLoRA: Efficient Finetuning of Quantized LLMs                                          NeurIPS 2023
 Sample Efficient Grasp Learning Using Equivariant Models                               RSS 2022
 One-shot Imitation Learning via Interaction Warping                                    CoRL 2023
 A Simple Framework for Contrastive Learning of Visual Representations                  ICML 2020
 TimeMixer: Decomposable Multiscale Mixing for Time Series Forecasting                  ICLR 2024
 YOLOv7: Trainable Bag-of-Freebies Sets New State-of-the-Art for Real-Time Object       CVPR 2023
 Detectors
                                                                                       (continued on next page)



                                                                                                               16
(Table A1 continued from previous page)
Source Artifact / Paper Title                                                          Venue / Source Year

Computer Systems (19 tasks)
Detecting Logic Bugs in Database Engines via Equivalent Expression Transformation      OSDI 2024
Efficient Auditing of Event-driven Web Applications                                    EuroSys 2024
Specification and Verification in the Field: Applying Formal Methods to BPF Just-in-   OSDI 2020
Time Compilers in the Linux Kernel
K9db: Privacy-Compliant Storage for Web Applications by Construction                   OSDI 2023
Fast, Flexible, and Practical Kernel Extensions                                        SOSP 2024
NrOS: Effective Replication and Sharing in an Operating System                         OSDI 2021
Operating System Support for Safe and Efficient Auxiliary Execution                    OSDI 2022
PaSh: Light-touch Data-Parallel Shell Processing                                       EuroSys 2021
Practically Correct, Just-in-Time Shell Script Parallelization                         OSDI 2022
Polyjuice: High-Performance Transactions via Learned Concurrency Control               OSDI 2021
QSYM: A Practical Concolic Execution Engine Tailored for Hybrid Fuzzing                USENIX Security 2018
RUDRA: Finding Memory Safety Bugs in Rust at the Ecosystem Scale                       SOSP 2021
Home, SafeHome: Smart Home Reliability with Visibility and Atomicity                   EuroSys 2021
Speedy Transactions in Multicore In-Memory Databases                                   SOSP 2013
SILT: A Memory-Efficient, High-Performance Key-Value Store                             SOSP 2011
Storm: Refinement Types for Secure Web Applications                                    OSDI 2021
Theseus: An Experiment in Operating System Structure and State Management              OSDI 2020
µSlope: High Compression and Fast Search on Semi-Structured Logs                       OSDI 2024
Efficiently Mitigating Transient Execution Attacks using the Unmapped Speculation      OSDI 2020
Contract
Scientific Computing (7 tasks)
GROMACS: High Performance Molecular Simulations through Multi-level Paral-             SoftwareX 2015
lelism from Laptops to Supercomputers
The Kaldi Speech Recognition Toolkit                                                   ASRU 2011
High-level, High-resolution Ocean Modeling at All Scales with Oceananigans             JOSS 2020
OpenFOAM: Open Source CFD Toolbox                                                      GitHub release, 2025
QUANTUM ESPRESSO: A Modular and Open-Source Software Project for Quantum               J. Phys.     Condens.
Simulations of Materials                                                               Matter, 2009
Integrated Analysis of Multimodal Single-Cell Data                                     Cell 2021
wannier90: A Tool for Obtaining Maximally-Localised Wannier Functions                  Comput. Phys. Com-
                                                                                       mun., 2008




                                                                                                             17
A2.    Agent System Prompt

For every run we provide the agent with the same system prompt, reproduced verbatim in Figure A1.
The placeholder <WORKDIR> is substituted with the per-task absolute workspace path on the VM (e.g.,
/home/vm/Desktop/<task>). The agent is also given the per-task deployment instructions (paper PDF
and code repository under <WORKDIR>), described separately in Section 3.2.


A3.    Diagnostic-Agent Prompt for Failed Runs

For each failed run, we run an LLM-based diagnostic agent. The agent is given SSH access to the final
VM state, the path to the reference setup script for the task, and the verifier outputs, and is asked
to identify the root cause of the failure. Diagnostic reports are used only for failure attribution and
never override the verifier’s pass/fail verdict (Section 3.3). The full system prompt is reproduced
verbatim in Figure A2. Placeholders <SANDBOX IP>, <SANDBOX KEY>, <WORKDIR>, and <TASK DEF PATH>
are substituted at run time with the target VM’s IP, the SSH key path, the per-task workspace, and the
per-task definition directory respectively.


A4.    Failure Pattern Counts for Tasks with Failed Runs

This section provides the failure-pattern counts supporting the failure analysis in Section 5.1. For each
task, we map the diagnostic agent’s Root Cause report from failed runs to the five recurring failure
patterns using keyword and regex heuristics. A task is counted under a pattern if any of its failed runs
is attributed to that pattern.
Table A2 reports the number of tasks in each group assigned to each pattern: the 20 all-fail tasks and
the 30 mixed-outcome tasks (at least one model succeeded and at least one failed). Every all-fail task
combines at least two patterns and 70% combine three or more, versus 40% on the mixed-outcome
side. Dependency/package issues and native-build failures are the most frequent patterns in both
groups, while GPU/CUDA setup, artifact/output mismatch, and system/VM-level execution are
more concentrated in the all-fail set.


A5.    Additional Trajectory Analysis

We segment each shell command into sub-commands by splitting on top-level &&, ||, or ;, which
exposes work hidden inside large chained commands. This section provides the phase taxonomy used
in Section 5.2. Table A3 defines each sub-command phase, and Table A4 reports the phase distribution
split by verifier outcome (success vs. failed).




                                                                                                      18
You are an autonomous LLM agent whose job is to set up a research paper's artifact on a provided Ubuntu machine and verify it with a simple
test. You do NOT run the full paper experiments.
Hard constraints (must follow)
- You have terminal access to a real Ubuntu host with root privileges.
- Username: vm
- passwordless sudo inside the sandbox
- ALL project-related files (source tree, extracted archives, build outputs, virtualenvs/conda envs, downloaded datasets, logs, VM disk
images, checkpoints) MUST live under:
  <WORKDIR>
- I will later run experiments from within <WORKDIR>, so your setup must be reproducible from there.
- Do NOT use Docker. If the authors provide a Dockerfile or "run via docker" instructions, ignore them and reproduce the same environment
directly on the host.
- For system paths (e.g. /etc, /usr, /var): do NOT use FileEditor to view/edit files directly (it won't use sudo). Use execute_bash + sudo
(or copy to a writable path, edit, then sudo-copy back).
- Only if the artifact is inherently system-level and cannot reasonably run directly (e.g., modified Linux kernel / kernel module requiring
reboot, special kernel configs), you MAY create and use a VM inside the host and run it there (e.g., QEMU/KVM). If you do, keep all VM
images/config under <WORKDIR> and provide exact VM run commands.
Goal
- Install dependencies, build/configure the artifact, and complete any required downloads (e.g. models, datasets) so that the environment is
ready.
- Run a simple smoke test to confirm the setup works (e.g. a small demo). Do NOT run the full paper experiments or long-running benchmarks.
- Prefer the simplest native setup: system packages via apt, plus Python venv as needed.
- If the host machine has a GPU and the artifact can use it, you must make the GPU usable and use it; CPU-only fallback does not count as
success.
Operating procedure (follow in order)
1) Initial inspection
   - List the contents of <WORKDIR>.
   - Identify: the code folder and the paper PDF.
   - Create vm in a new directory vm under <WORKDIR>, ONLY if you must use a VM
2) Read instructions and infer requirements
   - Read the paper PDF to understand: required OS/kernel assumptions, hardware assumptions, and what a minimal smoke test would be (not the
   full benchmarks).
   - Read README / INSTALL / scripts in the code.
   - If instructions assume Docker, translate them into native host steps.
Agent skills (optional -- use when helpful)
You have access to the following helper functions. Use them when they are useful; the file editor cannot read binary files (e.g. PDF). Run
them via bash so output appears in the terminal. Use absolute paths (e.g. under <WORKDIR>).
- parse_pdf(file_path): Extract and print text from a PDF (e.g. the paper). Does not include figures.
- parse_docx(file_path): Extract and print text from a DOCX file.
- parse_pptx(file_path): Extract and print text from a PowerPoint file.
- parse_latex(file_path): Convert LaTeX to plain text and print.
Invoke from the OpenHands Python environment (required for imports):
  cd $HOME/OpenHands/openhands-cli && uv run python -c 'from openhands.runtime.plugins.agent_skills.file_reader.file_readers import
  parse_pdf; parse_pdf("ABS_PATH")'
Replace parse_pdf with parse_docx, parse_pptx, or parse_latex as needed, and ABS_PATH with the absolute file path. Output will appear in the
command observation.
3) Dependency resolution
   - Determine all build/runtime dependencies (compilers, libraries, Python/Rust/Go/Java, CUDA, etc.).
   - Install with apt when appropriate.
   - For language-specific deps:
     - Python: Keep the paper's environment isolated from the agent's own runtime; Create and use a project-specific venv under
     <WORKDIR>/env/. Do not use uv, conda, or any other environment.
     - Rust/Go/Node: install toolchains if required
   - User consistency: Use sudo only for system packages (apt install) and global binaries (/usr/local/bin). Everything else -- language
   toolchains (Rust, Python venv), package managers, and build commands -- must be installed and run as the same non-root user I provided.
   - Record exact versions where possible (package versions, git commit hashes, pip freeze, compiler versions).
4) Build and configure
   - Build the artifact as required (e.g., make/cmake/bazel/meson).
   - Fix path issues so everything runs when invoked from within <WORKDIR>.
   - If the artifact or smoke test requires downloaded models, datasets, or weights: download them and ensure the smoke test can use them. Do
   not skip downloads needed for a minimal run.
5) Run a simple smoke test
   - Execute a minimal check that the setup works (e.g. small demo, or a short run with minimal data). Do NOT run the full paper experiments
   or long benchmarks.
6) If a VM is needed (only as last resort)
   - Explain why native host execution is infeasible.
   - Use QEMU/KVM if available; create VM disk under <WORKDIR>/vm/.
   - Provide:
     - VM OS image source and checksums if applicable
     - VM config (CPU/RAM/disk) and exact launch command(s)
     - How files are shared between host and VM (e.g., virtiofs/9p/scp) while keeping project files in <WORKDIR>
     - The exact commands inside the VM to build and run the smoke test
Communication requirements (what you must report at the end)
- As soon as you have finished the setup (success or blocked), you MUST call the finish tool with a final message. Do not stop after a bash
or file action without concluding.
- You MUST write a RUNBOOK file on disk so it can be collected: create exactly one file named RUNBOOK.MD under <WORKDIR> (i.e.
<WORKDIR>/RUNBOOK.MD) with the runbook content. The runbook must include:
  - Setup status: SUCCESS / PARTIAL / FAILED (and why)
  - Artifact root directory (exact path under <WORKDIR>)
  - Exact commands to: 1) activate the environment, 2) run the smoke test you used to verify the setup
  - Optionally: how one would run the main paper experiment(s) (you did not run them; document for reference only)
  - Expected output of the smoke test (and, if documented, of the main experiment)
  - Versions: OS, kernel, gcc/clang, python, pip freeze (or equivalent)
  - If VM used: VM location, launch command, login credentials, and how to run the smoke test inside it
- Your final (finish) message to the user should summarize the same information; the RUNBOOK.MD file is the canonical record that will be
collected from the machine.
- If you are blocked (e.g. missing dependency, build error), still write RUNBOOK.MD with what was done and what failed, then call finish.
Safety / guardrails
- Do not exfiltrate data.
- Do not delete or move the user-provided archives and paper.
- Do not modify files outside <WORKDIR> except for system dependency installation (apt) that is necessary.


             Figure A1: Agent system prompt. The task-specific paths are replaced by placeholders.
                                                                                                                                              19
 You are an expert systems engineer tasked with diagnosing why a research software environment failed to set up correctly on a bare-metal
 Linux machine.
 You have SSH access to the target machine. Perform a thorough, systematic diagnosis and produce a structured report.
 ## Hard constraints (must follow)
 - You have terminal access to a bare-metal Ubuntu sandbox with root privileges.
 - sandbox IP: <SANDBOX_IP>
 - Username: vm
 - ssh key file: <SANDBOX_KEY>
 - passwordless sudo inside the sandbox
 - ALL project-related files (source tree, extracted archives, build outputs, virtualenvs/conda envs, downloaded datasets, logs, VM disk
 images, checkpoints) are live under:
   <WORKDIR>
 ## Reference Setup Procedure
 The intended environment setup steps for this task are documented in:
   <TASK_DEF_PATH>/setup_reference.sh
Read this file first (`ssh -i <SANDBOX_KEY> -o StrictHostKeyChecking=no -o UserKnownHostsFile=/dev/null vm@<SANDBOX_IP> cat
<TASK_DEF_PATH>/setup_reference.sh`) to understand what the correct setup looks like, then use it as the ground truth when diagnosing what
went wrong.
 ## Your Goal
 Identify the root cause(s) of environment setup failure. Be specific: name the exact package, version conflict, missing driver, failed
 download, or compilation error. Do not speculate -- base every conclusion on evidence you collect from the machine.
 ## Diagnosis Checklist
 Work through each section. Skip sections that are clearly irrelevant to the task.
 ### 1. GPU & CUDA (if verify script needs gpu)
 - GPU model and driver version: `nvidia-smi`
 - CUDA toolkit version: `nvcc --version`, `ls /usr/local/cuda*`
 - cuDNN presence: `find /usr -name 'cudnn*.h' 2>/dev/null`
 - Check if installed packages match the CUDA version (e.g. torch+cu121 vs CUDA 12.4)
 ### 2. System Dependencies
 - OS and kernel: `uname -a`, `lsb_release -a`
 - Key system libraries:
   `dpkg -l | grep -E 'libssl|libffi|zlib|libc6|build-essential|cmake|ninja|openmpi|libopenblas'`
 - Missing shared libraries for any binary: `ldd <binary> 2>&1 | grep 'not found'`
 - Check for version mismatches between system libs and what packages expect
 ### 3. Python Environment
 - Python version: `python3 --version`
 - Active venv / conda env: `which python`, `pip --version`
 - Installed packages: `pip freeze`
 - Failed installs: check `pip install` logs if available
 - Conflicting dependencies: look for version pins that are mutually incompatible
 - Missing packages that the code imports but are not installed
 ### 4. Dataset & Model Downloads
 - Check if expected data files exist in the workspace
 - Check download logs for HTTP errors, timeouts, or authentication failures
 - Verify file integrity if checksums are available (truncated downloads)
 - Check available disk space: `df -h`
 ### 5. Compilation & Build Errors
 - Check for `.log` files in the build directory
 - Look at `make` output if captured
 - Check for missing headers or libraries that caused compilation to fail
 - Verify compiler version: `gcc --version`, `g++ --version`, `nvcc --version`
 - Check CMake cache for misconfigured paths
 ### 6. Version Compatibility
 - Identify any API breakage between installed package versions and the code
 - Check if the code was written for an older version of a framework (e.g. old PyTorch API, old TF 1.x style code)
 - Look for deprecation errors or `AttributeError`/`ImportError` in logs
 ### 7. Verify Script Failure
 - Show the exact output of the verify script: `cat verify.sh`, then run it and capture output
 - Identify which specific check failed and why
 - Show the content of any missing output files that were expected
 ### 8. Runtime Errors
 - Check workspace for any `.log`, `stderr`, `stdout`, or `error` files
 - Look at the last N lines of any training/evaluation logs
 - Identify OOM (out-of-memory) errors, NCCL errors, or timeout issues
 ## Output Format
 Produce a report with the following structure:
 **Root Cause**: [One sentence summary of the primary failure reason]
 **Evidence**:
 - [Specific finding 1 with exact output or file path]
 - [Specific finding 2]
 - ...
 **Secondary Issues** (if any):
 - [Other problems found that may cause failure even after fixing root cause]
 **Recommended Fix**:
 - [Concrete, actionable steps to fix each issue]
 Be concise. Paste only the relevant portions of command output, not full dumps. If a section shows no issues, say "OK" and move on.


Figure A2: Diagnostic-agent prompt for failed-run diagnosis. The runtime-specific values are replaced by
placeholders.



                                                                                                                                             20
                                                                         All-fail       Mixed-outcome
                  Pattern
                                                                          (20)               (30)
                  Dependency / package / version                             17 (85%)            23 (77%)
                  Native build / toolchain                                   17 (85%)            22 (73%)
                  GPU/CUDA setup                                             12 (60%)            11 (37%)
                  Artifact / output mismatch                                 11 (55%)            10 (33%)
                  System / VM-level execution                                11 (55%)             8 (27%)
                  Avg. patterns per task                                     3.40                   2.47
                  Tasks with ≥ 2 patterns                           20/20 (100%)            25/30 (83%)
                  Tasks with ≥ 3 patterns                            14/20 (70%)            12/30 (40%)
Table A2: Failure-pattern counts across the 20 all-fail tasks and the 30 mixed-outcome tasks. Per-task pattern
union is computed across failed runs: a task is counted under a pattern if any failed run for that task is attributed
to that pattern.




 Phase           Description
 Explore         Browse repository structure or metadata, such as listing files, searching paths, or checking git state.
 Env. Inspect    Inspect the execution environment, such as OS, Python, GPU, driver, disk, or installed packages.
 FileRead        Read documentation, source files, logs, or paper text through shell commands.
 Install         Install system-level or language-level dependencies, such as apt, pip, npm, or cargo packages.
 Build           Compile or build native components, binaries, kernels, or other generated artifacts.
 FileEdit        Modify source files, scripts, patches, or configuration files through shell commands.
 Config          Configure paths, environment variables, permissions, directories, symlinks, or runtime settings.
 Assets          Download or clone external datasets, models, checkpoints, repositories, or other required assets.
 Run/Test        Run artifact code, demos, tests, experiments, training, inference, binaries, or service checks.
 Service         Start or manage services, background processes, emulators, simulators, or QEMU-based execution.
 Finish          Write the required runbook or perform final completion-related actions.
           Table A3: Deployment phase taxonomy used for sub-command-level trajectory analysis.




 Outcome    Explore   Env. Inspect   FileRead   Install   Build   FileEdit     Config   Assets   Run/Test   Service   Finish
 Success      52.6%         10.7%      13.1%     3.8%     3.0%       1.5%       5.6%     0.9%        5.2%     1.9%     1.6%
 Failed       54.3%          6.8%      12.5%     5.0%     4.0%       1.6%       6.7%     0.8%        5.5%     1.1%     1.7%

Table A4: Sub-command-level deployment phase distribution, split by verifier outcome (successful vs. failed
runs). Each cell reports the share of sub-commands labeled with that phase.




                                                                                                                           21
A6.     Additional Trajectory Pattern Analysis

This section defines the trajectory signals used for the model-specific pattern analysis in Section 5.2.
Table A5 explains each signal, and Table A6 reports the corresponding model-level counts. Here Soft
timeout is an observation produced when the shell tool stops waiting , not the bash tool’s optional
input parameter timeout chosen by the agent .

  Signal                    Source                    Definition
  Task tracker              OpenHands action          An OpenHands planning tool that lets the agent create or
                                                      update an explicit TODO list during the run. We count
                                                      whether each run uses this tool at least once.
  Structured File Ac-       OpenHands action          Native OpenHands file-reading or file-editing actions.
  tions                                               These are distinct from reading or editing files through
                                                      Bash commands such as cat, sed, tee, or heredocs.
  MessageAction             OpenHands action          A natural-language message emitted by the agent. We use
                                                      this as a signal of narration or status reporting, not as a
                                                      deployment action by itself.
  Soft timeout              OpenHands       shell     A tool-level observation marked with exit code=-1. It
                            observation               indicates that the shell tool stopped waiting before the
                                                      command completed, rather than that the command nec-
                                                      essarily terminated with a normal shell error.
  Max-step termination      OpenHands        run-     A run stopped because OpenHands reached its configured
                            time status               maximum number of agent iterations.
  Heredoc use               Derived command-          A run contains shell heredoc patterns, often used to write
                            level metric              scripts, configuration files, or RUNBOOK content through
                                                      Bash.
Table A5: Trajectory signals used in the model-specific pattern analysis. Some signals are native OpenHands
actions or runtime observations, while others are derived during our post-processing.


                                            Structured                      Soft                  Message
        Model              Task tracker    File Actions     Heredoc       Timeout    Max-step      Share
        GPT-5.3-Codex             50/51             17/51      40/51     10/1898          4/51       0.1%
        GPT-5.4-Mini               2/51              0/51      46/51     47/1015          1/51       2.9%
        Gemini-3.1-Pro             0/51             12/51       0/51   1299/2820         14/51       0.0%
        Grok-4.20                  4/51             24/51       0/51      91/528          1/51      13.3%
Table A6: Detailed model-specific trajectory metrics. Task tracker, Structured File Actions, and Heredoc report the
number of runs in which the behavior appears. Soft Timeout is reported over paired shell-command observations.
Max-step is the number of runs that hit max-step termination. Message Share is the fraction of OpenHands agent
actions that are MessageActions.




                                                                                                                    22
A7.     Additional Recovery Analysis

This section expands the recovery analysis in Section 5.2. Table A7 defines the five recovery labels,
Table A8 shows how one label is selected when multiple behaviors appear, and Table A9 reports the
per-model distribution. The per-outcome distribution is reported in the main text (Table 6).
Primary recovery label selection. When multiple recovery types apply, we pick the highest-priority
match. Table A8 lists the nine ordered trigger conditions , each resolving to one of the five final labels.
Per-model distribution. GPT-5.3-Codex actively diagnoses failures by inspecting logs (136/189),
Gemini-3.1-Pro mostly spins in Loop (much of it soft-timeout polling rather than real recovery), and
Grok-4.20 tends to give up early (Table A9). This supports the outcome-level finding (Section 5.2) that
successful runs are more often inspect or adapt , while failed runs are more often repeat waiting or
retry loops .

    Recovery label            Description
    Inspect                   The agent reads logs, error output, source files, documentation, or configu-
                              ration files after a failed command.
    Adapt                     The agent changes the command, script, arguments, configuration, or envi-
                              ronment before retrying. This includes generic modify-and-retry, switching
                              to a different package, dependency version, toolchain, or installation path,
                              and clean-and-rebuild actions.
    Loop                      The agent enters repeated or unresolved recovery behavior, including soft-
                              timeout polling and repeated failure without meaningful change.
    Abort/Finish              The agent stops, writes a final report, or otherwise gives up shortly after the
                              failed command.
    Other                     The agent’s next actions are an exact retry of the failed command, or do not
                              fit any of the above categories.
      Table A7: Recovery taxonomy used to classify responses after failed shell-command observations.



A8.     Additional Stopping Analysis

This section expands the stopping behavior analysis in Section 5.3. We use three stop types in the
trajectory analysis: self-stop means that the agent explicitly ends the run, timeout means that the run
reaches its wall-clock time budget, and max-step means that the run reaches the maximum number of
allowed agent interaction steps. Table A10 reports verifier outcomes under each stop type.




                                                                                                                23
       Priority   Final label              Trigger condition (first match wins)
              1   Abort/Finish             No subsequent shell action, or the next action writes a run-
                                           book / matches a Finish signal.
              2   Loop                     Soft-timeout polling: failed command has exit code=-1 and
                                           the next action is empty input, Ctrl-C, or another soft timeout.
              3   Other                    Next command is byte-equal (after whitespace normaliza-
                                           tion) to the failed command (exact retry without meaningful
                                           change).
              4   Inspect                  Any of the next 1–3 actions reads logs, source, or documenta-
                                           tion (tail, cat, sed -n, grep, rg, less, find, ls, dmesg, pip
                                           show).
              5   Adapt                    Window text contains an install command together with ver-
                                           sion pins or driver/CUDA markers (==, <=, >=, cuda, cu11,
                                           cu12, driver, headless, python[0-9]).
              6   Adapt                    Window text contains a cleanup command (make clean, rm
                                           -rf, git clean, cargo clean, rebuild).
              7   Adapt                    Next command is different from the failed command and
                                           lands in an action phase (Install, Build, FileEdit-via-Bash,
                                           Config, Run/Test, Service).
              8   Loop                     Repeated failure: subsequent window has further non-zero
                                           exits and contains at most two distinct normalized command
                                           forms.
              9   Other                     None of the above conditions match.
Table A8: Priority order used to assign one final recovery label per failed command (higher priority wins when
multiple conditions match). The same final label can arise from different trigger conditions: Loop from priorities
2 and 8, Adapt from priorities 5, 6, and 7, and Other from priorities 3 and 9.




             Model               Failed Cmds.    Inspect   Adapt     Loop    Abort/Finish     Other
             GPT-5.3-Codex                189        136       34       7                7        5
             GPT-5.4-Mini                 305        141       83      37               41        3
             Gemini-3.1-Pro              1748        181      229    1294               25       19
             Grok-4.20                    192         28       15      76               70        3
             Table A9: Per-model recovery distribution after failed shell-command observations.




                                                                                                               24
                            Model            Stop type   Failed   Success
                            GPT-5.3-Codex    Self-stop   12/31     19/31
                            GPT-5.3-Codex    Timeout      9/16      7/16
                            GPT-5.3-Codex    Max-step      4/4       0/4
                            GPT-5.4-Mini     Self-stop   42/45      3/45
                            GPT-5.4-Mini     Timeout       4/5       1/5
                            GPT-5.4-Mini     Max-step      1/1       0/1
                            Gemini-3.1-Pro   Self-stop   15/28     13/28
                            Gemini-3.1-Pro   Timeout       8/9       1/9
                            Gemini-3.1-Pro   Max-step    14/14      0/14
                            Grok-4.20        Self-stop   28/32      4/32
                            Grok-4.20        Timeout     16/18      2/18
                            Grok-4.20        Max-step      1/1       0/1
Table A10: Verifier outcome by stop type. Each row uses runs with the corresponding stop type as the
denominator.




                                                                                                 25
