                                              AfterVibe: What Remains When the Conversation
                                              Ends
                                              Matteo Paltenghi , Satish Chandra

                                              Meta, USA

                                              We present AfterVibe, a framework that recovers natural-language specifications from a vibe coding
                                              session. Given a code artifact and the conversation trajectory that produced it, AfterVibe uses
                                              an LLM to extract an abstract natural-language specification capturing the developer’s intent, and
                                              validates it through a regeneration test: a second, blind AI agent re-implements the artifact from
                                              the spec alone, and the resulting code is graded against the original through a multi-tier validation
                                              pipeline. Spec quality is thus measured by whether an agent can regenerate passing code; if the
                                              verifiers deem the implementations equivalent the spec is considered strong, otherwise it is iteratively
                                              refined. Evaluating AfterVibe on 72 real-world vibe-coded projects from a company’s internal
                                              coding sessions, we find that its recovered specs are abstract by design—capturing behavioral intent
                                              without dictating implementation—yet strong. Multiple independent regenerations achieve a high
                                              mean regeneration score of 5.06 out of 6.0 while remaining diverse in their details, confirming that the




arXiv:2607.09900v1 [cs.SE] 10 Jul 2026
                                              spec constrains what without over-prescribing how. Besides outperforming existing human-authored
                                              descriptions, the specs can be further strengthened iteratively to a score of 5.74. A practical implication
                                              is that specifications—not code—could become the primary artifact for human review and the source
                                              of record at a time when AI-generated code is outpacing customary code review.

                                              Correspondence: Matteo Paltenghi (mattepalte@live.it), Satish Chandra (schandra@acm.org)




                                         1    Introduction
                                         The advent of powerful large language models (LLMs) and coding agents has enabled a new style of
                                         programming in which developers describe what they want in natural language and let an AI assistant generate
                                         the code. Andrej Karpathy coined the term vibe coding 1 to describe this practice: “you fully give in to the
                                         vibes, embrace exponentials, and forget that the code even exists.” What was once a niche experiment has
                                         rapidly become mainstream—millions of developers now use AI coding assistants daily, and entire startups ship
                                         products built almost exclusively through conversational prompting. In this work, we use “vibe coding” broadly
                                         to denote any code change produced through conversational interaction with an AI coding agent—including
                                         production-quality changes at scale that are ultimately reviewed and landed as accepted pull requests.
                                         A well-known problem with vibe coding is no one fully understands the code—not even the developer who
                                         prompted it into existence. Traditional software engineering relies on the assumption that someone—be it the
                                         original author or a reviewer—can read, reason about, and vouch for the correctness of source code. Vibe
                                         coding undermines this assumption at its root. The developer’s intent lives ephemerally in a chat transcript;
                                         the generated code is voluminous and often opaque; and the mapping between the two is implicit at best.
                                         This situation is especially problematic for code review, one of the most important quality-assurance practices
                                         in modern software engineering (Bacchelli and Bird, 2013). A reviewer confronted with ever-growing volume
                                         of AI-generated code has no concise, authoritative document that states what the code is supposed to do.
                                         The result is that a growing class of software that is effectively unreviewable, and not just because of the rate
                                         of code production. A recent industry study (DORA, 2025) finds code review not keeping up with AI-based
                                         code production.
                                         We propose AfterVibe, a framework that bridges the gap between vibe coding and traditional quality
                                         assurance. The name reflects its purpose: it captures what remains after a vibe coding session ends—a
                                             1 Andrej Karpathy, There’s a New Kind of Coding Emerging, X/Twitter post, February 2025.




                                                                                                     1
durable natural language specification distilled from the ephemeral conversation. AfterVibe takes as input a
code artifact and the conversation trajectory that produced it, and outputs a structured specification—what
we call a spec. The spec captures the developer’s intent in natural language; crucially, we treat requirements
as implicit—whatever is observable from the session is a sufficient expression of the requirements, since the
developer’s actions during the session serve as a proxy for their mental model.
To validate the faithfulness of the extracted specification, AfterVibe employs a new regeneration test: a
second, independent AI agent attempts to rebuild the artifact from the spec alone. The regenerated code is
then compared against the original artifact through a three-tier verification pipeline: (1) flexible test execution
using tests extracted from the session, (2) verification conditions (VCs) extracted independently from the
conversation trajectory, and (3) ground-truth alignment checking via structured LLM reasoning (Ugare and
Chandra, 2026). If the verifier deems the implementations equivalent, the spec is considered faithful; if not,
the process iterates. The regeneration test recalls the classical principle of design diversity and N-version
programming (Chen and Avizienis, 1978; Knight and Leveson, 1986): independent re-implementations of the
same intent expose ambiguity and unstated assumptions in a specification.
Our results show that natural-language specs derived from vibe coding sessions are essentially sufficient to
reconstruct the original code, are abstract, and can be obtained as a byproduct of the vibe coding process rather
than requiring separate authoring effort. Recovering requirements after implementation is the long-standing
aim of requirements traceability (Gotel and Finkelstein, 1994); AfterVibe is the first to pursue it directly
from human-AI coding trajectories.
Contributions. This paper makes the following contributions:

⋆ Retrospective specification recovery. We introduce retrospective specification recovery, the first technique to
  reconstruct developer intent after coding, directly from the agent trajectory (the conversation and code
  diff) of an AI-assisted coding session.
⋆ The regeneration strength test. We propose the regeneration test, an oracle that deems a specification
  faithful when a blind agent can regenerate functionally equivalent code from it alone, scored by a three-tier
  agent-as-a-judge verifier.
⋆ Evidence of real-world effectiveness. We implement the technique in AfterVibe and evaluate it on 72
  real-world, vibe-coded tasks from an industrial monorepo where recovered specifications reach a mean
  regeneration score of 5.74/6.0 after iterative strengthening.
⋆ Specs that are abstract yet sufficient. We show that recovered specifications are abstract by design—
  independent regenerations succeed while differing substantially in implementation, so a spec constrains what
  without over-prescribing how. The specs are also significantly more concise than the diff in size: average
  reduction of 5.6x in chars.
Vision. Our vision is that specifications, not code, should be the primary artifact of human authorship in the
age of AI-assisted development. Code—whether written by a human or generated by an AI—is merely an
implementation of intent. By elevating specifications to first-class status, we enable a new review paradigm in
which humans inspect abstract, readable statements of intent rather than voluminous, machine-generated
code. Beyond review, the specification can serve as the source of record —the canonical artifact from which
an implementation can be reconstructed, analogously to how executable code is compiled from high-level
languages.
This paper has shown the feasibility of recovering specifications from vibe coding sessions automatically. In
future work, we plan to study empirically whether and how well such specifications can get adopted as the
artifact to be reviewed and possibly a trusted source of record.


2    Motivating Example
To ground the discussion, we walk through an example inspired by a real internal coding session (anonymized).
A developer rewrites a resource-cleanup utility: a component that, when a logical tenant is torn down, deletes
the tenant’s leftover bookkeeping records across several internal stores. The original implementation was
blind —it issued a delete for every record type in every group whether or not the record existed—wasting a
rate-limited write budget. The developer uses an AI coding assistant to refactor it into a scan-then-delete


                                                        2
 Part A: Specification
 Intent and Rationale. “This change refactors the [[cleanup-utility class]] from a shard-group-centric cleanup
 model into a type-centric, scan-then-delete cleanup model. [...] each cleanup helper now scans its own group first and
 only deletes entities that actually exist.”
 Essential Design Decisions. (original 12 items; shown 1) “Each per-type group helper must scan its group once before
 deleting, so only existing entities consume the rate-limited write budget. [...] read failures must not inflate FOUND
 or DELETED_FAILED but must flip success and surface a message.”
 Undiscoverable Facts. (original 12 items; shown 2)
 • “The external-operations tri-state codes are: 0 = not present, 1 = deleted or dry-run, 2 = delete failed, 3 = read
   failed.”
 • “The [[placement service]] is not governed by [[write rate-limiter]]; this is why its fan-out must be explicitly
   bounded.”
 Part B: Requirements (2 of 34 shown)
 • The external-operations cleanup distinguishes read failures (code 3) from delete failures (code 2), and read failures
   do not increment FOUND or DELETED_FAILED.
 • The [[placement service]] delete fan-out uses windowed concurrency bounded by the inner parallelism flag, not
   an unbounded [[unbounded-collect helper]].


Figure 1 Full AfterVibe post-hoc spec (Part A + Part B).


 Title. [[project tag]] Make [[cleanup-utility class]] scan-then-delete per type with per-group summary.
 Summary. [[cleanup tool]] now scans each entity type once per group and deletes only entities that exist, replacing
 the old shard-group-by-shard-group walk. Motivation: the old approach spent the rate-limited write budget on no-op
 deletes, and an unbounded [[placement service]] fan-out flooded the store with not-found errors. [...]
 Test plan. Built the targets; ran the unit tests (Pass 7 / 9 / 8); lint clean; manually deleted all consolidated tiers.


Figure 2 Full human-authored summary.



model and to fix a cluster of correctness and robustness issues. The resulting change spans over 100,000
characters across many files.
AfterVibe takes the change and the conversation transcript as input and produces the structured specification
of Fig. 1.2 The full AfterVibe spec is under 10,000 characters. The full post-hoc specification (Fig. 1) has
two parts—Part A: Specification (three prose sections) and Part B: Requirements (a behavioral checklist of
declarative statements)—which together we refer to as the spec, and which are what a blind agent regenerates
from. For contrast, the developer’s own review description—title, summary, and test plan—used verbatim
as a baseline “spec” (Fig. 2, shortened).
Both artifacts describe the same change, and the human summary is not vague—it names the scan-then-delete
idea, the typed result, and the bounded fan-out. Yet the two rebuilds diverge sharply. The AfterVibe
rebuild passes both extracted tests (2/2), satisfies all twelve verification conditions (12/12), and matches the
reference on a holistic review, for a perfect 6 out of 6; the summary’s rebuild passes neither test (0/2), meets
only three of the twelve verification conditions (3/12), and fails the holistic review, scoring 0.5. The reason is
that a changelog reports what happened whereas a re-implementer needs the exact rules to follow. Two of the
verification conditions—shown in Fig. 3—make this concrete. For each, our spec states the exact rule (the
distinct codes returned for a failed read versus a failed delete, and that a tenant is skipped only when both
group lists are empty), so the rebuilt code satisfies the check. The summary omits both distinctions, so its
rebuild merges the two failure cases and stops as soon as either list is empty, failing both checks. The same
gap breaks the build itself: our spec names the exact build dependency to switch, whereas the summary only
   2 In the excerpts, [...] marks elided text and names in double-bracketed typewriter font (e.g. [[cleanup-utility class]]) are

anonymized placeholders for real internal identifiers. Technical values (return codes, field keys, defaults) are non-identifying and
kept verbatim.



                                                                 3
 Verification conditions.
 • Is a failed read of a record counted separately from a failed delete, and never tallied as a delete failure?
 • Does the cleanup skip a tenant only when both of its two group lists are empty, still cleaning the other when only
   one is empty?


Figure 3 Verification conditions: checks the grader extracts independently of the spec and runs on both the original
and the rebuilt code (2 of 12 shown).

                                                       refine if weak



                                                   1                                                        4           Regeneration Test
                                                          Spec                                 only input       Blind
                                                                               Spec S
                                                                                                                Agent              Code C ′
                                                       Distillation
                                        Traj. T
                                                   2                                                    Three-Tier Verifier
        Requirements    Vibe-coding                       VC                                                VC Check (×2)
                                      Metadata M                             Verif. Cond.
           (implicit)     session                      Extraction                                                                             5

                                                                             checked to pass
                                                                                                                                              regen score
                                        Code C                                                              Flex Test (×3)        +
                                                                              on Code C ✓                                                         (0–6)
                                                   3

                                                   Test Command                                             GT Align (×1)
                                                                            Test Commands
                                                     Extraction
                                                                             checked to pass
                                                                              on Code C ✓




Figure 4 Overview of the AfterVibe workflow. From a vibe-coding session (trajectory T , summary M , code C),
AfterVibe ➀ distills a specification S; ➁ extracts verification conditions and ➂ test commands (both validated on C
as oracles); ➃ regenerates code C ′ from S alone with a blind agent; and ➄ scores it with a three-tier verifier, iteratively
refining S when the score is weak.


says the data now comes from a different source, so the rebuilt project files disagree with the code and it
never compiles—which is why neither of its tests can run.


3     Approach
Figure 4 gives an overview of the AfterVibe workflow: from a vibe-coding session it distills a specification,
derives oracles (verification conditions and test commands), regenerates code from the specification alone, and
scores the regeneration with a three-tier verifier, iteratively refining the specification when the score is weak.
We detail each stage in the remainder of this section.

3.1   Problem Formulation
We define the retrospective specification recovery problem as follows. Given a code change C (unified diff)
produced by an AI coding assistant against a repository at a base commit, and a conversation trajectory T
between the developer and the assistant (user turns, agent tool calls, and messages), the goal is to produce
a specification S that is both strong—a satisfactory implementation can be derived from S alone—and
abstract—capturing behavioral intent without prescribing implementation. These desiderata are in tension:
implementation detail increases strength but reduces abstractness, while aggressive abstraction risks omitting
requirements. A good specification is thus abstract where it can be and concrete only where it must be, gated
by what an agent can discover from the environment.
We do not require the developer to reify their requirements explicitly; instead, we treat requirements as
implicit—whatever is observable from the session (the developer’s prompts, corrections, and accepted behaviors)
is a sufficient expression of the requirements.
We operationalize strength through the regeneration test (Section 3.4): if a blind AI agent, starting from
the same base commit, can produce a code change C ′ from S alone such that a three-tier verifier deems C ′
equivalent to C modulo the conversation T , then S is considered strong. The verifier grounds its judgment


                                                                        4
 Given the following conversation and diff, create a specification that another coding agent can use to reimplement
 the change.
 Part 1: Specification
 Write three short prose sections (no code, identifiers, paths, or line numbers unless essential and undiscoverable):
 • Intent and Rationale: what the code changes achieve.
 • Essential Design Decisions: key behaviors/criteria that must be preserved (separate essential from incidental).
 • Undiscoverable Facts: external names, thresholds, contracts, and domain gotchas an implementer cannot infer from
   the codebase. Includes file paths or symbol names explicitly requested in the conversation—preserve verbatim.
 Part 2: Requirements
 List the behavioral requirements as concise declarative statements. Focus on outcomes, not implementation. Do
 NOT include instructions about tests.

Figure 5 Extraction prompt for spec distillation (shortened for presentation).



in the task requirements expressed in T , accepting any implementation that conforms to the stated intent
regardless of structural differences from C.

The environmental grounding hypothesis. The abstractness desideratum rests on a hypothesis: a coding
agent can reconstruct substantial contextual information—build configurations, naming conventions, module
structure, API contracts—by navigating the repository, rather than requiring the specification to spell it
out. If this hypothesis holds, a spec needs to be concrete only for undiscoverable facts: decisions, thresholds,
and domain constraints that cannot be inferred from the codebase. Everything else can be stated abstractly,
because the agent’s environmental grounding fills the gap.

3.2    Spec Distillation
The distillation stage transforms the raw inputs—the code change C and the conversation trajectory T —into
an abstract natural-language specification S. We prompt the LLM with C and T , along with an extraction
prompt that instructs it to produce a structured specification in three prose sections—Intent and Rationale,
Essential Design Decisions, and Undiscoverable Facts—together with a behavioral checklist of requirements
phrased as declarative statements (Figure 5).
The extraction prompt enforces abstractness by default: it instructs the LLM to use “no code, identifiers,
paths, or line numbers unless essential and undiscoverable,” making concreteness the exception rather than
the rule. The three sections operate at different abstraction levels: Intent and Rationale is maximally abstract
(pure what and why); Essential Design Decisions sits at mid-level (which approach, but not how to code it);
Undiscoverable Facts is necessarily concrete—names, thresholds, and contracts that the agent cannot infer
from the environment. Section 2 shows a concrete example of a spec produced by this prompt.
This design reflects a key trade-off. A highly structured template (e.g., with separate sections for functional
requirements, data model, and error handling) would impose organization on every change, but risks over-
specifying simple patches and under-representing concerns that do not fit the template. By contrast, a
free-form but intent-focused prompt lets the LLM adapt the level of detail to the complexity of the change.

3.3    Three-Tier Verification
A key design question in AfterVibe is how to determine whether the regenerated code C ′ is functionally
equivalent to the original artifact C. We employ a three-tier verification pipeline that combines complementary
signals at increasing levels of semantic depth. Each tier is implemented as an autonomous subagent with
repository access, placing the verifier collectively in the agent-as-a-judge paradigm (Zhuge et al., 2025)—an
extension of the successful LLM-as-a-judge approach (Zheng et al., 2023; Gu et al., 2025). To offset known
judgment biases, no single tier is decisive: we combine execution-grounded and reasoning-based signals.

Flexible test execution. The first tier runs tests derived from the conversation trajectory—commands the
developer executed during the vibe-coding session—against the regenerated code C ′ . Because C ′ may expose
slightly different interfaces than the original C, AfterVibe employs a flexible test runner that adapts test


                                                          5
harnesses to minor interface changes (e.g., renamed entry points or reordered parameters) rather than failing
on superficial mismatches. This flexibility avoids overly prescriptive testing while still verifying that the
regenerated code satisfies the behavioral expectations embedded in the session.

Verification conditions. The second tier extracts verification conditions (VCs)—testable behavioral properties—
from the conversation trajectory T , the code change C, and the human-authored summary M (the diff title,
description, and test plan the developer submits for code review). VCs express what the code should do
(e.g., “the date-range picker filters all three charts”) without prescribing how. Crucially, VCs are not derived
from the spec S, which would make the validation circular. This independence ensures that VCs serve as an
unbiased oracle for assessing whether both C and C ′ satisfy the developer’s requirements. This independence
also lets the VCs act as a fixed reference point: as we will see later, we iteratively refine the spec S to make it
stronger, but we hold the verification conditions constant throughout, so that every candidate spec is judged
against the same oracle.

Ground-truth alignment. Verification conditions check properties individually; ground-truth alignment checks
whether the regeneration makes sense as a whole. Recent work on agentic code reasoning demonstrates that
LLM agents can perform meaningful semantic code analysis without executing code (Ugare and Chandra,
2026). The ground-truth alignment checker is an LLM agent that receives the conversation trajectory T ,
the original code change C, the regenerated code C ′ , and full access to the repository at the base commit. It
determines whether C ′ conforms to the intent expressed in T and the behavioral expectations established
by C. Equivalence is judged modulo the conversation: because vibe-coded changes are often broad and
under-determined, there is no single correct implementation. Any regeneration that conforms to the intent
and constraints expressed in the conversation is considered valid, even if it differs substantially from the
original in structure, naming, or implementation strategy.

Combining tiers. The three complementary tiers each contribute a weighted score to a combined regeneration
score (regen_score, 0–6), defined as regen_score = 3 flex + 2 vc + align, where flex ∈ [0, 1] is the fraction
of flexible tests that pass, vc ∈ [0, 1] is the fraction of verification conditions satisfied, and align ∈ {0, 1} is
the binary ground-truth alignment verdict. The weights encode a deployment-informed priority: execution-
grounded tests rank highest (3) as the strongest signal that the regeneration is not broken, verification conditions
moderate (2) as independent checks needing no execution infrastructure, and ground-truth alignment lowest (1)
to avoid over-rewarding literal reproduction of the reference patch. The weighting is a configurable design
choice, and our findings are robust to it: under equal weights, swapped flex/VC weights, and a ground-truth-
heavy weighting, the AfterVibe-vs-human comparison keeps the same sign and the per-task ranking is
preserved (Section 4.8).

3.4   The Regeneration Test
The regeneration test is the core validation mechanism of AfterVibe. A fresh LLM instance—with no access
to the original code C or conversation T —receives only the spec S and is asked to implement the artifact
from scratch. The intuition is that if the spec is sufficiently strong, a competent implementer (human or AI)
should be able to produce a functionally equivalent artifact.
Formally, we define the regeneration test as:
                                                     (
                                                      PASS if V (C ′ , C, T ) > τ
                               RegenTest(S, C, T ) =                                                            (1)
                                                      FAIL otherwise

where V is the three-tier verifier (Section 3.3), C ′ is the code produced by the blind regeneration agent, T
is the conversation trajectory providing task context, and τ is a passing threshold. The verifier applies test
execution, verification-condition checking, and ground-truth alignment, grounding its judgment in the task
requirements expressed in T .




                                                         6
3.5     Iterative Spec Refinement
When a task’s regenerated code scores below a threshold (regeneration score < τ , default τ = 6.0), AfterVibe
enters a per-task spec strengthening loop that refines the individual specification rather than the global
extraction prompt. This feedback-driven refinement follows the iterative generate–critique–improve paradigm
shown to be effective for LLM-based program repair, fuzzing, and general-purpose text improvement (Madaan
et al., 2023; Xia and Zhang, 2024; Fuz). The strengthening operates at the granularity of individual verification
conditions: for each VC that the regenerated code fails, a refinement LLM receives the original spec S, the
ground-truth diff C, the regenerated diff C ′ , the failed verification condition, and the grader’s rejection
reasoning. It then analyzes why the regeneration diverged from the original intent, identifies what was
ambiguous or underspecified in S, and produces a complete rewritten spec S ′ . The refined spec is re-evaluated
through the full pipeline: a fresh agent regenerates code from S ′ , and the three-tier verifier grades the result.

Best-of-K selection. After K strengthening rounds, AfterVibe keeps the best spec per task —the one that
achieved the highest regeneration score across the baseline and all rounds. Only tasks scoring below τ = 6.0
enter the loop; once a task reaches that threshold it exits early. Because the selection takes the per-task
maximum, the aggregate score is monotonically non-decreasing by construction: individual rounds may score
below the baseline (each is a single noisy rollout), but the best-of-K can only improve or stay the same. Note
that strengthening quality is ultimately bounded by the information in the conversation trajectory: a vague
or underspecified session yields a weak spec regardless of refinement effort.


4       Evaluation
We evaluate AfterVibe along six research questions:
• RQ1 – Regeneration Fidelity: Can a spec distilled from a vibe-coding session let a blind agent regenerate
  functionally equivalent code?
• RQ2 – Spec Strengthening: Can per-task verifier feedback strengthen individual specifications and increase
  solve rate?
• RQ3 – Abstraction vs. Strength: How does specification abstraction relate to regeneration fidelity, and what
  role does code-token leakage play?
• RQ4 – Regeneration Diversity: How similar are passing regenerations from the same spec, relative to natural
  upper and lower bounds?
• RQ5 – Grader Validity: Do the extracted verification conditions and test commands reliably separate correct
  code from wrong or degraded code?
• RQ6 – Comparison with Human-Authored Descriptions: Does AfterVibe produce more effective specs than
  the commit descriptions developers already write?

4.1     Dataset
4.1.1    Company Internal Dataset (TechInternal)

Our primary evaluation uses real-world coding sessions from an internal AI coding assistant that follows a
monorepo-based, incremental software development workflow. We refer to this dataset as TechInternal.

Source and curation. We sample multi-turn coding-assistant sessions from a 7-day window. Each session
consists of a developer interacting with an AI coding assistant to implement a code change in a large
monorepo. Sessions are selected by a curation funnel that filters for: (i) completed sessions with a landed diff,
(ii) non-trivial code changes (excluding pure config or generated-file edits), and (iii) sessions with sufficient
conversation context for spec extraction. This funnel yields 122 candidate sessions.

Ground-truth validation. We validate each candidate through a ground-truth verification run: the verification
pipeline is executed against the original landed code—not a regeneration. Two graders run on the original
code: the flexible test runner and the verification conditions checker. Ground-truth alignment is skipped
because there is no regeneration to compare against. Of the 122 candidates, 81 complete with both graders


                                                        7
producing a verdict (the remaining 41 are excluded due to infrastructure failures: evaluation-sandbox crashes,
grader-process timeouts, or tool-server startup errors); the excluded tasks have comparable verification-clue
counts (median 11 vs. 11), test-manifest counts (median 2 vs. 2), and similar or slightly higher session durations
(median 16 min vs. 14 min), consistent with infrastructure retries and timeouts rather than a task-complexity
bias. Of the 81 fully graded candidates, 72 pass both graders (88.9% pass rate), forming the final evaluation
set.

Failure analysis. The 9 ground-truth failures—sessions where the landed, CI-passing code fails at least
one grader—stem from three causes. Four are test-command environment mismatches: the LLM-extracted
test commands assume developer-machine dependencies (JavaScript runtimes, native shared libraries, device
interfaces, or build-graph targets) absent in the evaluation sandbox. Three are test-extraction failures: the
LLM extracted zero test commands or a nonexistent test target from the conversation transcript. Two are
grading-rule edge cases: the reference patch deletes the only test file, so the grader marks it skipped and
conservatively scores the empty result as a failure. None of these 9 represent code regressions—all 122 diffs
passed CI and landed successfully. The failures reflect limitations of mining test oracles from conversation
context; environment-aware test-command extraction could recover several of these tasks.

Characteristics. The 72 validated tasks span typical monorepo development activities: bug fixes, feature
additions, refactors, and infrastructure changes. The average original diff is 41,638 characters. Each task has on
average 10.5 verification conditions extracted from the conversation trajectory and 1.5 test commands derived
from the session. Both verification conditions and test commands are extracted by dedicated LLM-based
pipelines.

4.2   Experimental Setup
All LLM components—spec distillation, verification condition and test command extraction, strengthening
feedback, and the regeneration agent—use a single frontier large language model. The regeneration agent runs
in an agentic harness with code-editing tools, shell access, and automated graders that evaluate the result
after each attempt. The distillation prompt follows the template described in Section 3.2. The regeneration
agent receives only the vibe spec and a generic instruction to implement the described artifact. Verification
artifacts—verification conditions and test commands—are extracted independently from the conversation
trajectory using dedicated LLM-based extraction pipelines. Each task is evaluated by the three active graders
of the multi-tier verification pipeline (Section 3.3). We report the regeneration score (0–6 scale) as the primary
metric. For grader validity (Section 4.7), we also run spec-free negative controls to verify that the extracted
verification artifacts have genuine discriminative power—that is, they pass on correct code but fail on wrong
or degraded code.

4.3   RQ1: Regeneration Fidelity
For each task, we distill a post-hoc specification from the original conversation and code change C. A fresh
agent then receives only this specification and attempts to regenerate the target code change from the same
base commit. We compare the regenerated code C ′ against C using the three-tier verification pipeline.
The mean regeneration score is 5.06/6.0 (Table 1). Scores are aggregated over the 68 of 72 tasks that
produced a complete grader verdict; the remaining four never reached grading and are excluded from the
scored aggregates. Inspecting their trajectories shows these were all harness failures rather than model or task
failures: one event-serialization crash, one wall-clock timeout, and two startup aborts, and three of the four
produced no patch at all. The verification conditions grader achieves the highest individual pass rate (86.8%),
followed by flex test execution (72.1%) and ground-truth alignment (66.2%). When requiring all three graders
to pass simultaneously (strict conjunction), 54.4% of tasks succeed.

4.4   RQ2: Spec Strengthening
RQ2 asks whether per-task feedback from the three-tier verifier can strengthen individual specifications that
failed regeneration. Starting from 72 baseline specs, the strengthening loop (Section 3.5) targets tasks with


                                                        8
Table 1 Specification strategy comparison on the TechInternal dataset. Regeneration score is on a 0–6 scale; per-grader
rates are percentages. Human-authored summary = diff title + description + test plan used verbatim as the spec.

                         Strategy                             Regen    VC %    Flex %    GT %
                         Human-authored summary               4.23      64.0    60.0     50.0
                         AfterVibe                            5.06      86.8    72.1     66.2
                         AfterVibe + strengthening            5.74       –       –        –

Table 2 Spec strengthening round progression (Section 4.4, 72 tasks, 3 rounds). Per-round metrics are over the failing
cohort evaluated that round; the best-of row aggregates over all 68 considered tasks.

                           Round        Graded     Mean Regen         Flex %   VC %     GT %
                           Baseline           68       5.06            72.1    86.8     66.2
                           Round 1            31       4.68            60.0    86.7     54.8
                           Round 2            19       4.71            55.6    88.9     52.6
                           Round 3            11       4.38            45.5    81.8     45.5
                           Best-of-K          68       5.74             –       –        –


regeneration score < 6.0: 4 tasks are skipped due to null baselines, leaving 68 considered tasks of which 31
enter strengthening (the remaining 37 already score = 6.0). Each task undergoes up to 3 rounds of refinement,
with per-task early exit once regeneration score reaches 6.0.
Table 2 shows the round-by-round progression. Per-round regeneration scores are computed over only the
failing tasks evaluated that round (not all 68 tasks), so they are naturally lower than the all-task baseline—the
two are not directly comparable. The best-of-K row reports the aggregate after keeping the highest-scoring
spec per task across baseline and all rounds: the mean regeneration score rises from 5.06 to 5.74 (+0.68 delta)
over the 68 considered tasks. Of the 31 tasks that entered strengthening, 26 achieved a positive delta—an
84% success rate.
Figure 6 tracks the cumulative best-of-K regeneration score over the failing cohort (N = 31, the same tasks at
every round): it climbs steadily from a baseline of 3.93 to 4.99 after round 1, 5.34 after round 2, and 5.51
after round 3, showing that iterative strengthening progressively recovers the failing cohort.
At the per-task level, 26 of 31 tasks improve at least once across the three rounds, with many jumping to
≥ 5.5.
The graded-task count shrinks from 31 in round 1 to 19 in round 2 and 11 in round 3 as tasks that reach τ
early-exit the pool. VC pass rates remain high across rounds (82–89%), while flex-test and GT rates decline
in later rounds (flex 60.0% to 45.5%, GT 54.8% to 45.5%), reflecting the increasing difficulty of the residual
failing cohort.
Strengthening specs in this manner is an instance of loop engineering, where a human gives an optimization
target to an agent and let’s it iterate towards a goal.

4.5    RQ3: Abstraction vs. Strength
RQ3 investigates the tension between abstraction and strength: does a more abstract spec—one that
captures intent without implementation detail—sacrifice regeneration fidelity? For each task, we compute the
compression ratio CompressionRatio(S, C) = |C|chars /|S|chars , where |C|chars is the character length of the
ground-truth unified diff and |S|chars is the character length of the generated spec. Higher ratios indicate
stronger compression.

Three extraction strategies. We compare three spec-extraction configurations spanning the abstraction–detail
trade-off: (a) Standard, the default AfterVibe extraction with no length constraint (the Section 4.3 baseline);
(b) Constrained (1000c), targeting ∼1,000 characters for maximally abstract, intent-focused specs; and (c)


                                                          9
                                                                                                                           5.51
                                            N = 31 failing tasks (same set each round)                    5.34




mean regen score (0-6, higher better)
                                        5.4            best-of-K kept (cumulative)
                                        5.2
                                                                            4.99
                                        5.0
                                        4.8
                                        4.6
                                        4.4
                                        4.2
                                        4.0 3.93
                                            baseline                          r1                            r2              r3
                                                                             strengthening round (0 = baseline)
Figure 6 Cumulative best-of-K regeneration score across 3 strengthening rounds, over the failing cohort (same tasks at
every point).

Table 3 Spec abstraction vs. regeneration quality across three extraction strategies. Higher compression ratio = more
abstract spec; regeneration score on 0–6 scale. Leakage = fraction of the diff’s distinctive code tokens that appear
verbatim in the spec.

                                                           Strategy                Spec Avg     Ratio    Regen    Leak %
                                                           Constrained (1000c)        2,117    16.16×     4.81      23.7
                                                           Standard                   6,960     5.69×     5.06      38.6
                                                           Diff-preserving           11,836     2.79×     5.55      62.6


Diff-preserving, prompted to retain concrete implementation detail (file paths, identifiers, code snippets),
yielding specs that approach the original diff size. Table 3 reports the results.
At first glance, more concrete specs achieve higher regeneration scores: the diff-preserving variant (2.79×
compression) scores 5.55/6.0, outperforming the standard extraction (5.06, 5.69×) and the constrained variant
(4.81, 16.16×). Taken at face value, this would suggest that abstractness always hurts—but the leakage
column tells a different story.

Leakage confound. The diff-preserving spec copies 62.6% of the diff’s distinctive code tokens verbatim
(identifiers, literals), compared to 38.6% for standard and 23.7% for constrained. A per-tier breakdown shows
that the regeneration score advantage is disproportionately driven by the ground-truth alignment grader (89%
vs. 63–66%), which rewards matching the reference patch—exactly what high-leakage enables. The behavioral
graders also improve (VC: 91% vs. 81–87%; flex: 87% vs. 66–72%), but the gap is smaller. This suggests that
much of the diff-preserving advantage reflects literal code copying rather than better intent communication.
The standard extraction offers the best balance of abstractness and strength: meaningful compression (5.69×)
with moderate leakage (38.6%) and strong behavioral verification (VC 87%, flex 72%).

Abstractness confirmed by diversity. RQ4 provides complementary evidence: passing regenerations from the
standard spec are structurally diverse (chrF 0.89, not 1.0), confirming that the spec constrains what without
dictating how —the hallmark of a well-abstracted specification. The constrained strategy maintains tight
spec lengths (∼2,100 chars) regardless of diff size, while the diff-preserving strategy scales with diff length
(Figure 7).



                                                                                         10
                                    60000
                                                 AfterVibe
                                                 constrained AfterVibe (c1000)
                                    50000        diff preserving
                                                 spec = original
                                    40000



              spec length (chars)
                                    30000

                                    20000

                                    10000

                                       0
                                            0   10000 20000 30000 40000 50000 60000
                                                      original diff length (chars)
Figure 7 Per-task spec length vs. original diff length for the three strategies (axes capped at 60K chars); the dashed
line marks spec = original.


4.6   RQ4: Regeneration Diversity
RQ4 measures how much independent regenerations vary when conditioned on the same specification. For
each of the 72 tasks, we run the regeneration agent 3 times from the same base commit and specification,
yielding 200 task-pairs for pairwise comparison (of the 216 possible pairs, 16 are skipped because one rollout
produced no patch).

Similarity metrics. We compare each pair of regenerated patches at the file level using two complementary
measures: chrF (character n-gram F-score, normalized to [0, 1] via sacrebleu) captures character-level overlap
and is robust to minor formatting differences; difflib ratio (Python SequenceMatcher) captures sequence-level
structural similarity. For each task-pair, we take the union of files touched by either patch; files present on
only one side score 0.0, and files present on both sides are scored independently. The task-level similarity is
the mean of per-file scores.

Outcome segmentation. To relate code diversity to verification outcome, we segment task-pairs by whether
both regenerations pass (regeneration score ≥ 5.5), both fail, or one passes and the other fails (“mixed”). This
threshold matches the pass-to-pass anchor below, so the both-pass segment and that anchor cover the same
83 rollout pairs. Across the 200 task-pairs, both-pass pairs show the highest code agreement (chrF 0.888,
difflib 0.819), confirming that passing specifications reliably guide agents toward similar solutions. Both-fail
pairs remain nearly as similar (0.856/0.749)—under-specified specs drive independent agents toward the same
incorrect solution, a signal of systematic rather than random spec gaps—while mixed-outcome pairs are least
similar (0.835/0.740), consistent with genuine divergence driving the split outcome (overall 0.858/0.771).




                                                               11
Table 4 Negative control results (Section 4.7), conditioned on the TechInternal tasks whose correct code passes both
VC and flex (ground truth = 100% by construction). Lower pass rates on worse code indicate stronger discriminative
power.

                           Code quality                       Jobs     VC %      Flex %
                           Correct (ground truth)               72    100.0%    100.0%
                           Partial (50% hunks removed)          66    47.0%     42.4%
                           Pre-change (before change)           69     0.0%      58.0%
                           Wrong (permutation)                  70     1.4%     51.4%


Cross-rollout stability. Across the 3 rollouts, the per-task regeneration score is stable (rollout means of 5.06,
4.87, and 4.99; mean per-task standard deviation 0.49), and within-task code agreement is high (both-pass
chrF 0.89). Independent regenerations from the same spec thus converge on functionally equivalent solutions
while still varying in structure.

Reference anchors (patch-level). To calibrate the similarity values, we compare rollout-pair similarity against
two reference points using added-lines-only patches: (i) upper bound —each patch vs. itself with one added
line removed (mean chrF 0.982); (ii) lower bound —cross-task pairs of unrelated patches (mean chrF 0.180).
Pass-to-pass rollout pairs (both regeneration score ≥ 5.5) achieve chrF 0.899, sitting much closer to the upper
bound than the lower bound. This confirms that the specification constrains the solution space far beyond
what would be expected by chance, while still permitting minor structural variation.

4.7   RQ5: Grader Validity
RQ5 asks whether the extracted verification conditions and flex tests genuinely discriminate correct code from
incorrect code—that is, whether they are valid oracles rather than superficial checks that pass on any input.
We answer with three spec-free negative controls: the same verification conditions and test commands used in
ground-truth validation (Section 4.1.1) are run against degraded, pre-change, or wrong code instead of the
original landed code. No specification or regeneration agent is involved; only the code varies, so any difference
in grader pass rate directly measures discriminative power.

Pre-change control (before the change). Each task keeps its own oracle (verification conditions and test
commands) but is graded against the repository state before the task’s code was landed (the parent commit).
If task A’s VCs still pass on the pre-change checkout, the VCs are not checking the task’s intended behavior.

Degradation control (partial code). An LLM removes approximately 50% of each task’s diff hunks (whole
hunks, syntax-preserving), then the task’s own VCs and tests run against the degraded code. If VCs do not
notice the missing functionality, they lack coverage.

Permutation control (wrong code). Each task A keeps its own oracle but is graded against a different task B’s
landed code, assigned by a seeded derangement (Sattolo’s algorithm—a single-cycle permutation with no fixed
points, so every task receives unrelated code). If task A’s VCs still pass on task B’s code, the VCs are not
checking task-specific intent.
Table 4 reports the conditioned view: restricting to 72 tasks where correct code passes both graders (ground
truth = 100% by construction), we measure how often each grader also passes degraded, pre-change, or wrong
code. The verification-clues grader exhibits sharp monotonic discrimination: 100% on correct code → 47% on
partial → near-zero on pre-change (0%) and wrong code (1.4%). Not a single task’s verification conditions
pass on the repository state before the change was landed, and only 1 of 70 passes on an unrelated task’s code,
confirming that VCs check task-specific behavioral intent rather than surface properties. The flex-test grader
drops to 42% on partial code but remains elevated on pre-change (58%) and wrong code (51%)—because
many test commands pre-exist the change and can pass on unrelated code that happens to compile (e.g.,
“build the target”). Figure 8 visualizes the conditioned pass rates: VC’s sharp staircase (100% → 47% →
0–1%) confirms strong task-specific discrimination.      These results validate the ground-truth filtering of


                                                        12
                                  Correct code (ground truth)                     Pre-change code (before change)
                                  Partial code (degradation 50%)                  Wrong code (permutation)
                                     100.0
                                     47.0
            VC pass rate             0.0
                                      1.4

                                     100.0
                                     42.4
  Flex test pass rate                58.0
                                     51.4
                                   0       20       40       60       80       100
                                   pass rate on GT-passing tasks (%, verdict-only)
Figure 8 Per-grader pass rates by code condition, conditioned on the 72 tasks whose correct code passes both VC and
flex.


Section 4.1.1: tasks whose VCs pass on correct code are genuine positive signals, not false positives from
overly permissive oracles.

4.8     RQ6: Comparison with the Human-Authored Summary
RQ6 asks whether the structured extraction of AfterVibe produces specifications that are more effective
for regeneration than the descriptions developers already author as part of their normal workflow. We
compare against a human-authored baseline: the human-authored summary that the developer submits for
code review—consisting of the diff title, description, and test plan—used verbatim as the specification. The
regeneration agent, three-tier grading pipeline, and evaluation infrastructure remain identical across both
conditions, isolating the effect of the specification source.
Table 1 includes the comparison. AfterVibe achieves a mean regeneration score of 5.06, compared to 4.23
for the human-authored summary—a difference of 0.82 points on the 0–6 scale, with a consistent gap across all
three graders.3 The human-authored summary is shorter on average (2,129 vs. 6,960 characters), yet captures
less of the intent required for successful regeneration.
This result is consistent with the intended audience of each artifact. The human-authored summary is written
for human reviewers who have access to the accompanying code; it describes what changed at a high level but
typically omits the behavioral constraints, design decisions, and undiscoverable facts that a blind regeneration
agent requires. AfterVibe’s structured extraction recovers precisely these elements from the conversation
trajectory, producing specifications that are more verbose but substantially more effective as self-contained
implementation guides.

4.9     Implication of Results
Our results offer empirical support for the environmental grounding hypothesis (Section 3.1). The high pass
rate after refinement suggests that agents already extract substantial context from the repository environment—
build configurations, existing module structure, naming conventions—without this information appearing in
   3 Robust to weighting: under equal (2, 2, 2), swapped (2, 3, 1), and GT-heavy (1, 2, 3) weights, the AfterVibe-vs-human gap

stays 0.82–0.89 points and the per-task ranking is unchanged (Spearman ≥ 0.97).



                                                             13
the spec. This has a provocative implication: much of what we traditionally consider “specification” is actually
shared knowledge that a grounded agent can infer from the codebase. The useful part of a specification—the
part that needs to be explicitly written—consists primarily of project-specific decisions that cannot be derived
from the environment. This perspective clarifies the abstractness goal of Section 3.1: a spec should be concrete
only for facts the agent cannot discover from the environment, and abstract for everything else.
As mentioned earlier, our vision is that such specifications can supplant code as the artifact of human review
and even the source of record; exploring these possibilities in industrial practice is future work.


5     Threats to Validity
Internal validity. Our oracle is LLM-generated, so the test suite could encode hallucinated or trivial behavior.
We address this by validating every generated test against the original landed code, ensuring the suite
encodes actual—not hallucinated—behavior; the negative-control analysis of Section 4.7 further shows that
the verification conditions sharply separate correct code from degraded, pre-change, and unrelated code.
A second threat is reconstruction variance: because agents are non-deterministic, regenerating from the
same specification can yield different regen_scores across runs. We quantify this through the cross-rollout
diversity analysis of Section 4.6, which shows that independent regenerations remain functionally stable
(per-task regen_score standard deviation of 0.49) while varying in surface structure. Finally, there is a risk
of information leakage between spec extraction and regeneration: if a single agent extracted the specification
and then regenerated the code immediately afterward, it could still hold the original code in its context and
reproduce it from memory rather than from the specification, inflating scores. We address this by separating
the two stages into distinct sessions with no shared context, so the regenerating agent sees only the specification
and cannot fall back on the original code.
External validity. Our dataset consists of 72 tasks drawn from coding-assistant sessions, which may not be
representative of all vibe-coded software or generalize to other languages, domains, or developer populations;
we mitigate this by sampling tasks from real coding-assistant sessions rather than synthetic benchmarks,
grounding the evaluation in genuine developer activity. In addition, all experiments use a single frontier LLM,
and because specification quality depends on model capability, our results may not generalize to other or
weaker LLMs.


6     Related Work
AfterVibe draws on several lines of research concerned with specification extraction and its uses.

6.1   Spec-Driven Development
Recent industry tools such as GitHub SpecKit (GitHub, 2025) and Amazon Kiro (Amazon Web Services,
2025) have recently adopted spec-first workflows, requiring developers to author specifications upfront and
maintain them alongside code. All of these approaches—from Design by Contract to modern spec-first
IDEs—assume that specifications are written before or during coding. AfterVibe delivers similar benefits
post-hoc, recovering specifications from sessions where none were written, making it compatible with vibe
coding by construction. Kiro in particular uses the EARS notation (Mavin et al., 2009) (Easy Approach to
Requirements Syntax) for its requirements.md, a small set of semi-formal templates that constrain otherwise
unstructured natural-language requirements. AfterVibe’s verification conditions are themselves natural-
language rubrics, and recent LLM-based methods have shown that such requirements can be autoformalized
into EARS or related semi-formal templates (Imran et al., 2025; Roßkothen et al., 2026; Giannakopoulou
et al., 2021). AfterVibe could therefore act as an entry point from vibe coding into spec-driven development.
Recasting code changes into natural language is also the goal of code summarization and commit-message
generation (Liu et al., 2018, 2022; Feng et al., 2020); our specifications differ in that they must be precise
enough to regenerate the change, not merely describe it.
Traditional approaches, too, require writing specifications before or during implementation. Meyer’s Design
by Contract (Meyer, 1992) mandates pre- and postconditions written before code, with runtime checking


                                                        14
enforcing compliance. Test-driven development encodes intent as executable specifications that precede the
code under test. More recently, TiCoder (Fakhoury et al., 2024) formalizes user intent interactively during
LLM-based code generation through iterative test refinement.

6.2    LLM-Based Specification Extraction
Close technical relatives of AfterVibe are systems that extract specifications from code. SpecGen (Ma et al.,
2025) generates formal JML specifications from Java methods using LLMs combined with mutation testing and
static analysis to filter incorrect candidates. AutoSpec (Wen et al., 2024) produces Dafny specifications through
LLM-driven counterexample-guided refinement. Endres et al. (Endres et al., 2024) generate postconditions
from natural-language docstrings, validated against existing test suites. SpecRover (Ruan et al., 2025)
iteratively extracts code intent from buggy code and issue descriptions to guide automated patch generation.
All of these systems derive specifications from code or domain knowledge alone. AfterVibe differs in two
ways: it extracts from the agent trajectory—conversation and diff together—using the conversation as a richer
signal of developer intent; and it produces natural-language specs validated through regeneration rather than
formal annotations tied to a specific verification framework.

6.3   Specification Verification and Quality
A fundamental challenge in specifications is knowing whether the spec is correct. VeriAct (Misu et al., 2026)
shows that verifier-accepted Dafny specs are often semantically wrong, and Le Cong et al. (Le-Cong et al.,
2025) question whether LLM-generated specs capture true semantics or merely surface patterns. Lahiri frames
intent formalization as a grand challenge (Lahiri, 2026) and proposes grounding spec correctness in concrete
input-output examples (Lahiri, 2024). On the formal side, AutoVerus (Yang et al., 2025) generates machine-
checked proofs of Rust code from specifications, and Verus-SpecGym (Agarwal et al., 2026) benchmarks
natural-language-to-formal autoformalization—notably finding that execution-based checking catches spec
errors that LLM-as-judge evaluation misses.
These approaches rely on formal verification, symbolic checking, or executable formal specifications. After-
Vibe’s answer is pragmatic: a spec is correct if it can regenerate functionally equivalent code, validated by
a multi-tier pipeline—no theorem proving required. It works in the opposite direction, recovering natural-
language specs post-hoc rather than formalizing intent up front, and thus operationalizes Lahiri’s vision
without formal specification languages. The Kiro team (Kiro Team, 2026) similarly use LLM reasoning to
elicit tests from informal requirements, echoing our extraction of verification conditions from conversations.

6.4    Agent Trajectories as Artifacts
An emerging body of work uses or produces trajectory data from coding agents. Zhu et al. (Zhu et al.,
2026) generate specifications from failing tests and natural-language descriptions, then use them to guide
program repair. RECODE-H (Miao et al., 2025) benchmarks iterative code generation with multi-level human
feedback, treating the full interaction as a trajectory. TrajAudit (Wang et al., 2026) also operates on agent
trajectories, but for failure diagnosis—localizing where and why an agent went wrong rather than capturing
what it achieved.
These works use trajectories to generate code, benchmark interactions, or diagnose failures. AfterVibe
instead treats trajectories as a specification source, extracting self-validating verification conditions and
regeneration specifications from the conversation record. AfterVibe is, to our knowledge, the first system to
use agent coding trajectories—conversation and diff together—for post-hoc intent capture.


7     Conclusion
We have presented AfterVibe, a framework for distilling verifiable specifications from vibe-coded artifacts.
By extracting structured specs and validating them through a regeneration test backed by a three-tier
verification pipeline—flexible test execution, independent verification conditions, and ground-truth alignment—
AfterVibe bridges the gap between the ease of vibe coding and the rigor of traditional software engineering.



                                                       15
Our evaluation measures whether extracted specs can regenerate ground-truth diffs, how the level of abstraction
relates to regeneration fidelity, how much independent regenerations vary, and whether feedback can strengthen
individual specs. We believe that specifications—not code—should become the primary artifact of human
authorship in the age of AI-assisted development, and AfterVibe is a first step toward realizing this vision.


Data Availability
We provide the full pipeline prompts as supplementary material for reproducibility—and, to our knowledge,
no human vibe-coding trajectory dataset with execution environments is yet openly available.


Acknowledgments
Use of generative AI. We disclose that generative AI was used throughout this work—drafting text, writing
analysis scripts, processing data, and generating tables—with all output reviewed and verified by the authors,
who take full responsibility for the final manuscript.


References
Fuzz4All: Universal Fuzzing with Large Language Models | Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM 46th International
  Conference on Software Engineering. https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3597503.3639121.
Anmol Agarwal, Natalie Neamtu, Pranjal Aggarwal, Seungone Kim, Jannis Limperg, Cedric Flamant, Kanna
  Shimizu, Bryan Parno, and Sean Welleck. Verus-SpecGym: An Agentic Environment for Evaluating Specification
 Autoformalization. https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.26457v1, May 2026.
Amazon Web Services. Kiro: Move beyond AI coding to agentic engineering, 2025.
Alberto Bacchelli and Christian Bird. Expectations, outcomes, and challenges of modern code review. In 2013 35th
  International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE), pages 712–721, May 2013. doi: 10.1109/ICSE.2013.
  6606617.
Liming Chen and Algirdas Avizienis. N-version programming: A fault-tolerance approach to reliability of software
  operation. In Digest of Papers, FTCS-8: Eighth Annual International Conference on Fault-Tolerant Computing,
  pages 3–9, Toulouse, France, 1978.
DORA. State of AI-assisted software: DORA report. https://dora.dev/research/2025/dora-report/, 2025. URL
 https://dora.dev/research/2025/dora-report/. Online; DORA (DevOps Research and Assessment), Google Cloud.
Madeline Endres, Sarah Fakhoury, Saikat Chakraborty, and Shuvendu K. Lahiri. Can Large Language Models
 Transform Natural Language Intent into Formal Method Postconditions? Proceedings of the ACM on Software
 Engineering, 1(FSE):84:1889–84:1912, July 2024. doi: 10.1145/3660791.
Sarah Fakhoury, Aaditya Naik, Georgios Sakkas, Saikat Chakraborty, and Shuvendu K. Lahiri. LLM-Based Test-Driven
  Interactive Code Generation: User Study and Empirical Evaluation. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering,
  50(9):2254–2268, September 2024. ISSN 1939-3520. doi: 10.1109/TSE.2024.3428972.
Zhangyin Feng, Daya Guo, Duyu Tang, Nan Duan, Xiaocheng Feng, Ming Gong, Linjun Shou, Bing Qin, Ting Liu, Daxin
  Jiang, and Ming Zhou. CodeBERT: A Pre-Trained Model for Programming and Natural Languages. In Trevor Cohn,
  Yulan He, and Yang Liu, editors, Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020, pages 1536–
  1547, Online, November 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.findings-emnlp.139.
Dimitra Giannakopoulou, Thomas Pressburger, Anastasia Mavridou, and Johann Schumann. Automated formalization
  of structured natural language requirements. Information and Software Technology, 137:106590, September 2021.
  ISSN 0950-5849. doi: 10.1016/j.infsof.2021.106590.
GitHub. Spec kit: Toolkit for spec-driven development, 2025.
O.C.Z. Gotel and C.W. Finkelstein. An analysis of the requirements traceability problem. In Proceedings of IEEE
  International Conference on Requirements Engineering, pages 94–101, April 1994. doi: 10.1109/ICRE.1994.292398.




                                                        16
Jiawei Gu, Xuhui Jiang, Zhichao Shi, Hexiang Tan, Xuehao Zhai, Chengjin Xu, Wei Li, Yinghan Shen, Shengjie
   Ma, Honghao Liu, Saizhuo Wang, Kun Zhang, Yuanzhuo Wang, Wen Gao, Lionel Ni, and Jian Guo. A Survey on
   LLM-as-a-Judge, October 2025.
Muhammad Huzaifa Imran, Touseef Tahir, Bilal Hassan, and Hamid Jahankhani. Automated EARS-Based Requirements
 Generation with Lightweight Large Language Models. In 2025 IEEE International Conference on Technology
 Management, Operations and Decisions (ICTMOD), pages 1–6, October 2025. doi: 10.1109/ICTMOD66732.2025.
 11371998.
Kiro Team. Deep dive: Spec analysis and requirements verification in Kiro. Kiro Blog, https://kiro.dev/blog/, 2026.
  URL https://kiro.dev/blog/. Kiro Blog.
John C. Knight and Nancy G. Leveson. An experimental evaluation of the assumption of independence in multiversion
  programming. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, SE-12(1):96–109, January 1986. ISSN 1939-3520. doi:
  10.1109/TSE.1986.6312924.
Shuvendu K. Lahiri. Evaluating LLM-driven User-Intent Formalization for Verification-Aware Languages. In Proceedings
  of the 24th Conference on Formal Methods in Computer-Aided Design – FMCAD 2024, pages 142–147. TU Wien
  Academic Press, October 2024. ISBN 978-3-85448-065-5. doi: 10.34727/2024/isbn.978-3-85448-065-5_19.
Shuvendu K. Lahiri. Intent Formalization: A Grand Challenge for Reliable Coding in the Age of AI Agents, March
  2026.
Thanh Le-Cong, Bach Le, and Toby Murray. Can LLMs Reason About Program Semantics? A Comprehensive
  Evaluation of LLMs on Formal Specification Inference, May 2025.
Shangqing Liu, Cuiyun Gao, Sen Chen, Lun Yiu Nie, and Yang Liu. ATOM: Commit Message Generation Based on
  Abstract Syntax Tree and Hybrid Ranking. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, 48(5):1800–1817, May
  2022. ISSN 1939-3520. doi: 10.1109/TSE.2020.3038681.
Zhongxin Liu, Xin Xia, Ahmed E. Hassan, David Lo, Zhenchang Xing, and Xinyu Wang. Neural-machine-translation-
  based commit message generation: How far are we? In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM/IEEE International Conference
  on Automated Software Engineering, ASE ’18, pages 373–384, New York, NY, USA, September 2018. Association for
  Computing Machinery. ISBN 978-1-4503-5937-5. doi: 10.1145/3238147.3238190.
Lezhi Ma, Shangqing Liu, Yi Li, Xiaofei Xie, and Lei Bu. SpecGen: Automated Generation of Formal Program
  Specifications via Large Language Models. In 2025 IEEE/ACM 47th International Conference on Software
  Engineering (ICSE), pages 16–28, April 2025. doi: 10.1109/ICSE55347.2025.00129.
Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler Hallinan, Luyu Gao, Sarah Wiegreffe, Uri Alon, Nouha
 Dziri, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yiming Yang, Shashank Gupta, Bodhisattwa Prasad Majumder, Katherine Hermann,
 Sean Welleck, Amir Yazdanbakhsh, and Peter Clark. SELF-REFINE: Iterative refinement with self-feedback.
 In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, NIPS ’23, pages
 46534–46594, Red Hook, NY, USA, December 2023. Curran Associates Inc.
Alistair Mavin, Philip Wilkinson, Adrian Harwood, and Mark Novak. Easy Approach to Requirements Syntax (EARS).
  In Proceedings of the 2009 17th IEEE International Requirements Engineering Conference, RE, RE ’09, pages
  317–322, USA, August 2009. IEEE Computer Society. ISBN 978-0-7695-3761-0. doi: 10.1109/RE.2009.9.
B. Meyer. Applying ’design by contract’. Computer, 25(10):40–51, October 1992. ISSN 1558-0814. doi: 10.1109/2.161279.
Chunyu Miao, Henry Peng Zou, Yangning Li, Yankai Chen, Yibo Wang, Fangxin Wang, Yifan Li, Wooseong Yang,
  Bowei He, Xinni Zhang, Dianzhi Yu, Hanchen Yang, Hoang H. Nguyen, Yue Zhou, Jie Yang, Jizhou Guo, Wenzhe
  Fan, Chin-Yuan Yeh, Panpan Meng, Liancheng Fang, Jinhu Qi, Wei-Chieh Huang, Zhengyao Gu, Yuwei Han,
  Langzhou He, Yuyao Yang, Yinghui Li, Hai-Tao Zheng, Xue Liu, Irwin King, and Philip S. Yu. RECODE-H: A
  Benchmark for Research Code Development with Interactive Human Feedback, October 2025.
Md Rakib Hossain Misu, Iris Ma, and Cristina V. Lopes. VeriAct: Beyond Verifiability – Agentic Synthesis of Correct
 and Complete Formal Specifications, March 2026.
Julian Roßkothen, Dominik Fuchß, Florian Erdösi, Maria Floruß, Jan Keim, and Tobias Hey. On Converting Natural
  Language Requirements into Semi-Formal Templates Using LLMs. In 2026 IEEE 34th International Requirements
  Engineering Conference (RE), 2026.
Haifeng Ruan, Yuntong Zhang, and Abhik Roychoudhury. SpecRover: Code Intent Extraction via LLMs. In 2025
  IEEE/ACM 47th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE), pages 963–974, April 2025. doi:
  10.1109/ICSE55347.2025.00080.


                                                         17
Shubham Ugare and Satish Chandra. Agentic Code Reasoning, March 2026.
Minxing Wang, Xiaofei Xie, and Yintong Huo. TrajAudit: Automated Failure Diagnosis for Agentic Coding Systems,
  May 2026.
Cheng Wen, Jialun Cao, Jie Su, Zhiwu Xu, Shengchao Qin, Mengda He, Haokun Li, Shing-Chi Cheung, and Cong
  Tian. Enchanting Program Specification Synthesis by Large Language Models Using Static Analysis and Program
  Verification. In Arie Gurfinkel and Vijay Ganesh, editors, Computer Aided Verification, pages 302–328, Cham, 2024.
  Springer Nature Switzerland. ISBN 978-3-031-65630-9. doi: 10.1007/978-3-031-65630-9_16.
Chunqiu Steven Xia and Lingming Zhang. Automated Program Repair via Conversation: Fixing 162 out of 337 Bugs
  for $0.42 Each using ChatGPT. In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software
 Testing and Analysis, ISSTA 2024, pages 819–831, New York, NY, USA, September 2024. Association for Computing
  Machinery. ISBN 979-8-4007-0612-7. doi: 10.1145/3650212.3680323.
Chenyuan Yang, Xuheng Li, Md Rakib Hossain Misu, Jianan Yao, Weidong Cui, Yeyun Gong, Chris Hawblitzel,
  Shuvendu Lahiri, Jacob R. Lorch, Shuai Lu, Fan Yang, Ziqiao Zhou, and Shan Lu. AutoVerus: Automated Proof
  Generation for Rust Code. Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages, 9(OOPSLA2):396:3454–396:3482,
  October 2025. doi: 10.1145/3763174.
Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang, Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li,
  Dacheng Li, Eric P. Xing, Hao Zhang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. Judging LLM-as-a-judge with MT-bench
  and Chatbot Arena. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems,
  NIPS ’23, pages 46595–46623, Red Hook, NY, USA, December 2023. Curran Associates Inc.
Taohong Zhu, Lucas C. Cordeiro, Mustafa A. Mustafa, and Youcheng Sun. Specification Vibing for Automated
  Program Repair, February 2026.
Mingchen Zhuge, Changsheng Zhao, Dylan R. Ashley, Wenyi Wang, Dmitrii Khizbullin, Yunyang Xiong, Zechun
  Liu, Ernie Chang, Raghuraman Krishnamoorthi, Yuandong Tian, Yangyang Shi, Vikas Chandra, and Jürgen
  Schmidhuber. Agent-as-a-Judge: Evaluate Agents with Agents. In Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference
 on Machine Learning, pages 80569–80611. PMLR, October 2025.




                                                        18
A      Prompt Artifacts
This appendix reproduces, verbatim, the full prompt suite behind AfterVibe’s post-hoc specification and
verification pipeline (section 3), released as supplementary material (section 7). Each box is a single artifact
read directly from our released prompt package; template placeholders of the form {...} are left unfilled
so the exact prompt as run is visible. The artifacts fall into two groups: the specification and extraction
prompts that distill a reusable specification, verification conditions, and a runnable test manifest from a coding
session (section A.1), and the multi-tier verification graders that score code regenerated from a specification
(section A.2).

A.1     Specification and Extraction Pipeline
These five prompts run over a coding session (its conversation plus the resulting diff) to produce the abstract
specification and the evidence used to verify code later regenerated from it.

    Prompt A.1 – Specification Creation

    Distills a structured, abstract specification from a code change and its originating conversation so a blind coding
    agent can regenerate functionally equivalent code.

     Given the following conversation and diff , create a specification that another coding
    ,→ agent can use to reimplement the change .

     ## Part 1: Specification
     Write three short prose sections ( no code , identifiers , paths , or line numbers unless
    ,→ essential and und iscoverable ) :
     − ∗∗ Intent and Rationale ∗∗: what the code changes in the conversation and diff achieve
     − ∗∗ Essential Design Decisions ∗∗: the key behaviors / criteria that must be preserved
    ,→ ( separate essential decisions from incidental impleme ntation choices ) .
     − ∗∗ U ndiscove rable Facts ∗∗: external names , thresholds , contracts , and domain gotchas
    ,→ an implementer cannot infer from the codebase . This includes any exact file paths ,
    ,→ filenames , or symbol names the user explicitly requested in the conversation —
    ,→ preserve those verbatim , since they are a required part of the contract .

     ## Part 2: Requirements
     List the behavioral conditions a reviewer would check , each phrased as a declarative
    ,→ statement . Focus on behavior , not code structure . Avoid over − specificity that would
    ,→ match only one impleme ntation .

     Focus on OUTCOMES , not IMPLEMEN TATION . Avoid :
     − File names , function names , or variable names — UNLESS the user explicitly specified
    ,→ that exact name or path in the conversation , in which case it is a hard requirement :
    ,→ keep it verbatim and add a requirement stating that the named artifact exists and
    ,→ behaves as asked
     − Impl ementati on details or code snippets
     − Line numbers or specific code locations
     − Mentioning changes explicitly

    The spec should allow someone to verify correctness WITHOUT reading the actual code .

     ## CRITICAL : Test File Handling
     Do NOT include instructions to add , modify , or write tests , and do NOT add verification
    ,→ conditions about test coverage or tests passing . Test changes are already present in
    ,→ the working directory ; focus only on the non − test production code .

    Conversation context :
    ```
    { conversation_context }
    ```

    Unified Diff :
    ```
    { unified_diff }




                                                            19
```



Prompt A.2 – Per-Task Specification Strengthening

Rewrites a specification whose regenerated code scored below threshold, used in a best-of-K-over-rounds loop that
keeps the highest-scoring specification per task.

 You are refining a specification that failed the regeneration test . A blind coding
,→ agent was given only the specification below and asked to reimplement a code change
,→ from scratch ; the regenerated code did not satisfy one of the behavioral
,→ verification conditions expected of the original change .

 Your task is to analyze why the regeneration diverged from the original intent ,
,→ identify what was ambiguous or underspe cified in the specification , and produce a
,→ complete rewritten specification that closes that gap . Output the full rewritten
,→ specification — not a diff , not a list of edits — so it can be used on its own by a
,→ fresh agent that has never seen the original code or conversation .

## Inputs

ORIGINAL SPECIFICATION ( S ) :
```
{ original_spec }
```

GROUND − TRUTH CODE CHANGE ( C ) :
```
{ g r o u n d _ t r ut h _d i ff }
```

REGENERATED CODE CHANGE (C ') produced from the specification above :
```
{ r e g e n e r a t e d_ dif f }
```

FAILED VERIFICATION CONDITION ( a behavioral property the regeneration did not satisfy ) :
```
{ failed_verification_condition }
```

GRADER ' S REJECTION REASONING :
```
{ grader_rejection_reasoning }
```

## Analysis instructions

 1. Compare the ground − truth change ( C ) with the regenerated change (C ') and pinpoint
,→ where the regeneration diverged from the intended behavior .
 2. Identify what in the original specification ( S ) was ambiguous , missing , or
,→ undersp ecified such that a competent implementer produced the divergent behavior —
,→ focus on the failed verification condition and the grader ' s reasoning .
 3. Rewrite the specification so that the failed behavior is now unambiguously required ,
,→ while keeping the spec abstract : describe outcomes and essential design decisions ,
,→ not code structure . Do not over − specify to a single implementation , and do not leak
,→ function names , variable names , paths , or line numbers unless they are
,→ undisco verable external contracts .
 4. Preserve everything in the original specification that was already correct ; only
,→ strengthen what led to the failure .

## Output requirements

 − Output the COMPLETE rewritten specification (S ') , self − contained and ready for a
,→ fresh regeneration agent .




                                                       20
 − Keep the same overall structure as the original : the three prose sections ( Intent and
,→ Rationale , Essential Design Decisions , Undis coverabl e Facts ) plus the declarative
,→ requirements checklist .
 − Do NOT include instructions to add , modify , or write tests , and do NOT add
,→ verification conditions about test coverage or tests passing .
 − The rewritten spec must allow someone to verify correctness WITHOUT reading the
,→ actual code .



Prompt A.3 – Verifiable-Condition Extraction

Pulls structured, provenance-tagged verification conditions out of the session evidence for later checking against
regenerated code.

Extract structured verification clues from the source coding − agent evidence bundle .

A verification clue is a unique , checkable YES / NO question about behavior , scope , user
,→ corrections , or acceptance criteria that generated code C ' should satisfy . Existing
,→ graders still inspect the final code diff , so each clue must remain concise and
,→ independently answerable .

 Return JSON with ` verification_clue_records `. Each record must include :
 − ` clue_id `: stable raw id such as " raw_0001 ".
 − ` clue `: the verification clue string , phrased as a YES / NO question .
 − ` provenance `: one or more evidence objects .
 − ` unsupported_by `: include " f i n al _ u n i f i e d _ d i f f " when the final diff does not directly
,→ support the clue .
 − ` extraction_stage `: use " raw_ex traction ".
 − ` pre_dedup_clue_ids `: include the record ' s raw id .
 − ` abstraction_level `: one of " user_goal " , " b e h a v i o r a l _ c o n t r a c t " , " api_surface " , or
,→ " i m p l e m e n t a t i o n _ d e t a i l ". Classify how specific the clue is . Prefer " user_goal " or
,→ " b e h a v i o r a l _ c o n t r a c t ". Only use " i m p l e m e n t a t i o n _ d e t a i l " when the user explicitly
,→ requested that exact detail .

Allowed provenance ` source_type ` values :
− conversation
− metadata
− f i n a l _ u ni f i e d _d i f f
− test_commands
− unknown

 Rules :
 − Return only clues grounded in the evidence bundle .
 − Prefer 5 −15 concise clues when available .
 − Deduplicate duplicate or near − duplicate clues .
 − Phrase each clue as a YES / NO question a reviewer can answer from the code diff .
 − Do not include vague clues such as " Does the code work correctly ?".
 − Prefer outcome − level product or API contract clues over impl ementatio n mechanics .
 − Include implementatio n details only when the conversation makes them acceptance
,→ criteria .
 − Avoid clues about imports , private attributes , helper function names , file layout , or
,→ build graph changes unless the conversation makes that exact detail part of the
,→ requested contract .
 − Apply the counter factual test : a good clue should be answerable YES for any correct
,→ impleme ntation of the user ' s request , not only the specific implem entation in this
,→ diff . If a clue would be answerable YES only with the exact same variable names ,
,→ file layout , or internal API calls , it is too specific — rewrite it as a behavioral
,→ or contract − level question .
 − Set ` not_supported_by_final_diff ` whenever no ` final_unified_diff ` provenance
,→ directly supports the clue .

 Better clue style :
 − Good : " Can personal and project coding − agent memory be routed to the memory service
,→ independently behind separate rollout gates ?"




                                                              21
 − Good : " Does project memory remain project − scoped when routed through the memory
,→ service , while personal / session memory remains viewer − scoped ?"
 − Good : " Do memory − service read failures fall back to directory listing before
,→ surfacing a not − found error ?"
 − Too implementation − specific : " Does A g e n t M e m o r y E x t e n s i o n import M e m o r y C l i e n t F a c t o r y in
,→ a TYPE_CHECKING block ?"
 − Too implementation − specific : " Is a private ` _memory_storage ` attribute initialized to
,→ None ?"
 − Too test − specific : " Are two tests named
,→ ` t e s t _ s t o r a g e _ r e n a m e _ p e r s o n a l _ d e l e g a t e s _ t o _ m e m o r y ` added ?"

 Exclusions — do NOT include clues about :
 − Intermediate agent actions , tool calls , or debugging steps ( e . g . " the agent searched
,→ for X " , " validation was run ") .
 − External system state not part of the diff ( e . g . feature − flag or config − service
,→ metadata , spreadsheet contents , dashboard outputs , database state , API responses ) .
 − Test execution outcomes ( e . g . " all tests should pass " , " code should pass linting " , " N
,→ tests pass ") . Test running is handled by a separate grader .
 − Test existence or test coverage ( e . g . " a test should be added " , " tests should be
,→ updated ") . Test verification is handled by a separate grader .
 − Analysis outputs , numeric results , or data artifacts produced during the conversation
,→ that are not part of the code change .

 Focus exclusively on what the code diff should contain : behavioral changes , structural
,→ modifications , API usage patterns , removed / added logic , and correctness invariants .

Conversation context :
```
{ conversation_context }
```

Metadata JSON :
``` json
{ metadata_json }
```

Final unified diff :
``` diff
{ unified_diff }
```



Prompt A.4 – Test-Manifest Extraction

Distills a runnable test manifest (shell commands) from the session so regenerated code can be checked by execution.

Extract a runnable test manifest from source coding − agent validation evidence .

 Rules :
 − Return only JSON objects with command and category .
 − Commands must be self − contained and runnable from the repository root .
 − If a command must run from a subdirectory , include an explicit relative ` cd path &&
,→ ... `.
 − Prefer observed test tool calls and shell commands over prose summaries .
 − Convert observed ` run_test ` , ` run_tests ` , and ` run_test_with_coverage ` tool args into
,→ shell commands .
 − Read the conversation chr onol ogi ca ll y . If older validation commands conflict with
   later validation commands , keep only the latest final validation commands .
 − Exclude tests for files , classes , or commands that the later conversation says
   were deleted , renamed , replaced , removed , obsolete , or no longer referenced .
 − Prefer commands from final " Verification " , " Validated " , " Done " , or summary
   sections over commands from early exploration or intermediate stack edits .
 − Prefer concise smoke coverage over exhaustive historical retries . Keep the
   strongest 1 −3 final commands unless more are explicitly required .
 − Do not output raw JSON tool args as commands .
 − Include build / lint commands when they were used as correctness checks .




                                                                22
 − Use category " regression " for commands from the original validation flow .
 − Use category " new " only for additional validation commands clearly requested or
,→ proposed .
 − Do not invent build targets , file paths , package scripts , or setup commands .
 − Do not convert table names , product abbreviations , or package labels into repo paths .
 − Do not include dependency installation , server startup , file inspection , or
,→ data − query commands .
 − If the conversation says tests passed but does not show the command , return no
,→ command for that claim .

 Test command conversion examples :
 − Observed `{{" test_file_pa th ":"/ path / to / repo / frontend / lib / foo / __tests__ / FooTest . js "}} `
   −> ` jest frontend / lib / foo / __tests__ / FooTest . js `
 − Observed `{{" test_class ":" FooTest "}} `
   −> ` test − runner FooTest `
 − Observed `{{" test_name ":" FooTest :: testSomething "}} `
   −> ` test − runner FooTest :: testSomething `
 − Observed `{{" test_file_pa th ":"/ path / to / repo / backend / example / tests / test_foo . py "}} `
   −> ` python −m pytest backend / example / tests / test_foo . py `
 − Observed `{{" file_path ":"/ path / to / repo / backend / example / tests / test_foo . py "}} `
   −> ` python −m pytest backend / example / tests / test_foo . py `
 − Observed `{{" test_file_pa th ":"/ path / to / repo / backend / example / FooTest . cpp "}} `
   −> no command unless a build target or concrete command is also present .
 − Observed a build − system test command with an explicit target ( e . g . ` build − tool test
,→ // project / tests : test_manifest_extractor `)
   −> keep the build − system test command .
 − Observed a build − system build command with an explicit target ( e . g . ` build − tool build
,→ // project : run_optimizer `)
   −> keep the build − system build command .
 − Observed ` cargo test ` without a working directory
   −> keep it only if the surrounding context makes the repository − root command correct .
 − Observed ` run_test ` / ` run_tests ` with empty args `{{}} `
   −> no command .
 − Older observed
,→ `{{" test_fil e_path ":"/ path / to / repo / frontend / lib / foo / __tests__ / OldTest . js "}} ` ,
   but the later conversation says ` OldTest . js ` was deleted and final
   verification ran ` NewTest `
   −> omit ` OldTest . js ` and keep ` test − runner NewTest `.

Observed test commands / tool args :
```
{ observed_test_commands }
```

Conversation :
```
{ conversation_context }
```



Prompt A.5 – Runtime Instruction Wrapper

The instruction wrapper an implementer agent receives at runtime to regenerate code from a specification and
satisfy its verification conditions.

 You are given a ∗∗ Re im pl em en ta ti on Spec ∗∗ — a r e i m p l e m e n t a t i o n specification plus a
,→ verification checklist that describes what changes need to be made to this codebase .
,→ Your task is to implement code changes that satisfy the specification and ALL of its
,→ verification conditions .

## R e i m p l e m en ta tio n Spec

{ spec }

## Instructions




                                                      23
   1. Read the spec carefully − focus on the ∗∗ Intent and Rationale ∗∗ , ∗∗ Essential Design
  ,→ Decisions ∗∗ , ∗∗ Undi scoverable Facts ∗∗ , and the ∗∗ Verification Conditions ∗∗ checklist
   2. Explore the codebase to understand the current state
   3. Implement code changes that satisfy the spec and answer YES to every verification
  ,→ condition
   4. The spec describes WHAT should change , not HOW to implement it − use your judgment
  ,→ for implementation details
   5. Do NOT over − engineer − make the minimal changes needed to satisfy the spec and its
  ,→ verification conditions




A.2   Multi-Tier Verification Graders
Three graders evaluate regenerated code C ′ against the reference change C and combine into a single weighted
score, solve_score = 3 · flex + 2 · vc + 1 · align (maximum 6.0). Each continuous grader emits its grade as a
final FINAL_GRADE=<ratio> line; the ground-truth grader is binary. Tier labels below follow the grader
source files, which number the ground-truth tier first—the reverse of the paper’s ordering.

  Prompt A.6 – Flexible Test-Execution Grader (Tier 3)

  Runs the extracted test manifest against C ′ and reports a continuous pass ratio in [0, 1].

   You are an execution verification grader . You run a provided test manifest against
  ,→ generated code C ' and may salvage tests only when failures are structural
  ,→ mismatches . You report a continuous PASS RATIO in [0.0 , 1.0] ( the fraction of
  ,→ runnable tests that pass ) , not a binary pass / fail verdict . This ratio feeds the
  ,→ solve_score aggregator .

  Test Manifest ( JSON array ) : { test_manifest }

  Max Salvage Attempts : { m a x _ s a l v a g e _ a t t e m p t s }

  Diff Number : { diff_number }

  Repository Type : { re posi tory _ty pe }
  Repository Path : { re posi tory _pa th }

   Instructions :
   − Parse test_manifest as a JSON array of objects with command and category fields .
  ,→ category is " new " or " regression ".
   − If the manifest is empty or invalid , call s e t _ f l o a t _ g r a d i n g _ r e s u l t _ t o o l with
  ,→ pass = false and grade =0.0 and the reason " no runnable tests ".
   − Run each command exactly as provided from the repository root , or from
  ,→ r ep os i tory _pat h for git repositories .
   − If a test fails because of import paths , symbol names , module names , or
  ,→ constructor / function signatures , you may adapt the test harness and rerun .
   − You may adapt imports , module names , function / class names , and signatures only .
   − You must not adapt assertions , expected values , or behavioral checks .
   − Never modify im plementation code .
   − If a test command references a test method or class that does not exist , inspect the
  ,→ original / reference patch C by running the version control system ' s diff command for
  ,→ the reference change { diff_number } via ex ec u te _c om ma n d .
   − Mark a missing test as SKIPPED only when the original / reference patch C removed or
  ,→ renamed that test , or removed the feature / behavior that the test covered . Use the
  ,→ reason " test intentionally removed by reference patch ". Do not count it as a failure .
   − If the reference patch does not remove or rename the missing test / covered behavior ,
  ,→ or if the evidence is inconclusive , mark the command as FAIL . Do not skip solely
  ,→ because the generated checkout lacks the test .
   − Stop after m a x _ s a l v a g e _ a t t e m p t s total adaptations .
   − Compute passed_ratio = passing tests / ( total tests − skipped tests ) , the fraction of
  ,→ runnable tests that pass after allowed salvage , a float in [0.0 , 1.0]. Report the
  ,→ exact ratio ( e . g . 0.5 for 1 of 2) — do NOT round to 0 or 1. If every test is SKIPPED
  ,→ so there are no runnable tests , set passed_ratio =0.0.




                                                                  24
 − REQUIRED FINAL STEP : call s e t _ f l o a t _ g r a d i n g _ r e s u l t _ t o o l exactly once with
,→ grade = passed_ratio ( the numeric ratio ) and pass = true only if all regression tests
,→ pass ( excluding skipped ) and every runnable new test passes after allowed salvage ,
,→ otherwise pass = false . The grade carries the continuous signal consumed by the
,→ solve_score aggregator ; the pass flag is only a coarse indicator and is NOT used in
,→ the score .
 − Wait for the s e t _ f l o a t _ g r a d i n g _ r e s u l t _ t o o l response before writing your final verdict .
 − REQUIRED : the VERY LAST line of your exit report must be a single machine − readable
,→ marker in EXACTLY this format , with no other text on the line :
,→ ` FINAL_GRADE = < passed_ratio > ` where < passed_ratio > is the numeric ratio as a decimal
,→ in [0.0 , 1.0] ( e . g . ` FINAL_GRADE =0.5 `) . Emit it on every path , including when there
,→ are no runnable tests ( use ` FINAL_GRADE =0.0 `) . This line is parsed by the optimizer
,→ and must always be present and exact .
 − Exit with the report below .

< format >
   # Flex Test Verdict

  ## Test Results
  | Command | Category | Result | Adaptations | Evidence |
  | − − − − − − − − −| − − − − − − − − − −| − − − − − − − −| − − − − − − − − − − − − −| − − − − − − − − − −|
  | [ cmd ] | [ new / regression ] | [ PASS / FAIL / SKIPPED ] | [ none or summary ] | [ log excerpt
,→ or reason for skip ] |

  ## Summary
  total : [ N ]
  passed : [ N ]
  skipped : [ N ]
  passed_ratio : [0.0 −1.0] ( passing / ( total − skipped ) )                 −− this value is reported as
,→ grade
  new_p ercentage : [0.0 −1.0 or N / A ]
  r e g r e s s i o n _ p e r c e n t a g e : [0.0 −1.0 or N / A ]

   ## Result
   passed_ratio =[0.0 −1.0] −− [ Pass / Fail ]
</ format >



Prompt A.7 – Verifiable-Condition Check Grader (Tier 2)

Checks how many of the extracted verification conditions C ′ satisfies and reports a continuous ratio in [0, 1].

 You are an intent − level verification grader . You check whether generated code C '
,→ satisfies concrete verification clues extracted from the source conversation . You
,→ report a continuous satisfaction RATIO in [0.0 , 1.0] ( the fraction of evaluable
,→ clues that C ' satisfies ) , not a binary pass / fail verdict . This ratio feeds the
,→ solve_score aggregator .

Verification Clues ( JSON array of unique clue strings ) : { v e r i f i c a t i o n _ c l u e s }

Pass Threshold : { pass_thresh old }

Repository Type : { re posi tory _ty pe }
Repository Path : { re posi tory _pa th }

 Instructions :
 − Parse v er i f i ca t i o n_ c l u e s as a JSON array of unique clue strings . If it is invalid ,
,→ call s e t _ f l o a t _ g r a d i n g _ r e s u l t _ t o o l with pass = false and grade =0.0 and a clear reason .
 − If v e r i f ic a t i on _ c l ue s is an empty array , do not inspect the diff . Record a SKIP by
,→ calling s e t _ f l o a t _ g r a d i n g _ r e s u l t _ t o o l with pass = true and grade =0.0 and summary
,→ " SKIP : no verification clues to evaluate " , then exit with a report that has
,→ passed =0 , failed =0 , skipped =0 , total =0 , sa ti sf i ed _r at i o =0.0 ( N / A ) , and Result = Skip .
 − Use c h e c k _ c h a n g e s _ s i n c e _ l a s t _ c o m m i t to inspect generated changes C '.
 − For each clue , read the relevant source files and decide PASS or FAIL .
 − Cite file : line evidence when possible ; use " not found " evidence for failures .




                                                           25
 − IMPORTANT : Your scope is the behavioral correctness of the code diff . Do NOT evaluate :
   − Test existence or test coverage — whether tests were added or updated is handled by
,→ the test − execution grader .
   − Test execution outcomes — whether tests pass is handled by the test − execution
,→ grader .
   − External system state — feature − flag config , config − service metadata , spreadsheet
,→ data , dashboard data .
   If a clue falls into these categories , mark it SKIP and exclude it from the satisfied
,→ ratio .
 − Compute sa tisf ied _rat io = passed clues / ( total clues − skipped clues ) . This is the
,→ fraction of evaluable verification clues satisfied by C ' , a float in [0.0 , 1.0].
,→ Report the exact ratio ( e . g . 0.6667 for 2 of 3) — do NOT round to 0 or 1.
 − If every clue is SKIP and there are no evaluable clues , record a SKIP by calling
,→ s e t _ f l o a t _ g r a d i n g _ r e s u l t _ t o o l with pass = true and grade =0.0 and summary " SKIP : no
,→ evaluable verification clues " , then exit with Result = Skip . Do not mark all − skipped
,→ clue sets as Fail .
 − REQUIRED FINAL STEP : call s e t _ f l o a t _ g r a d i n g _ r e s u l t _ t o o l exactly once with
,→ grade = sa tisf ied_ rat io ( the numeric ratio ) and pass = true when sa t is fi ed _ ra ti o is at
,→ least pass_threshold , otherwise pass = false . The grade carries the continuous signal
,→ consumed by the solve_score aggregator ; the pass flag is only a coarse threshold
,→ indicator and is NOT used in the score .
 − Wait for the s e t _ f l o a t _ g r a d i n g _ r e s u l t _ t o o l response before writing your final verdict .
 − Do not finish , exit , or claim the grading result was recorded until
,→ s e t _ f l o a t _ g r a d i n g _ r e s u l t _ t o o l has returned successfully .
 − REQUIRED : the VERY LAST line of your exit report must be a single machine − readable
,→ marker in EXACTLY this format , with no other text on the line :
,→ ` FINAL_GRADE = < satisfied_ratio > ` where < satisfied_ratio > is the numeric ratio as a
,→ decimal in [0.0 , 1.0] ( e . g . ` FINAL_GRADE =0.6667 `) . Emit it on every path , including
,→ SKIP ( use ` FINAL_GRADE =0.0 `) . This line is parsed by the optimizer and must always
,→ be present and exact .
 − Exit with the JSON − like report below .

< format >
   # Verification Clues Verdict

  ## Clue Results
  | Clue | Result | Evidence |
  | − − − − − −| − − − − − − − −| − − − − − − − − − −|
  | [ full clue ] | [ PASS / FAIL / SKIP ] | [ file : line or not found or reason for skip ] |

  ## Overall
  passed : [ N ]
  failed : [ N ]
  skipped : [ N ]
  total : [ N ]
  s at is fi e d_ra tio : [0.0 −1.0] ( passed / ( total − skipped ) )          −− this value is reported as
,→ grade

  ## Result
  s at is fi e d_ra tio =[0.0 −1.0] −− pass_thresh old =[ value ] −− [ Pass / Fail ]

   FINAL_GRADE =[0.0 −1.0]
</ format >



Prompt A.8 – Ground-Truth Alignment Grader (Tier 1)

Issues a binary Pass/Fail behavioral-equivalence verdict comparing C ′ against the reference change C.

 You are an expert code verifier . You verify whether generated code C ' is behaviorally
,→ equivalent to the reference change C for the stated specification , modulo the source
,→ conversation context when it is provided .

Task Description : { ta sk _d es cr ip ti on }




                                                          26
Specification : { s pe c_ de sc rip ti on }

Conversation Context : { c o n v e r s a t i o n _ c o n t e x t }

Repository Type : { re posi tory _ty pe }
Repository Path : { re posi tory _pa th }
Reference Patch Available : { h a s _ re f e r e n c e _ p a t c h }

 Instructions :
 − Read the task description , optional specification description , and optional
,→ conversation context .
 − Use c h e c k _ c h a n g e s _ s i n c e _ l a s t _ c o m m i t to inspect generated changes C '.
 − If a reference patch is available , use g e t _ r e f e r e n c e _ p a t c h to inspect C .
 − Read relevant source files before making behavioral claims .
 − Trace concrete scenarios and actively look for evidence against your conclusion .
 − REQUIRED FINAL STEP ( do this exactly once , and BEFORE you call exit ) : call
,→ s e t _ g r a d i n g _ r e s u l t _ t o o l with pass = true when C ' is behaviorally equivalent to C ( your
,→ verdict is Pass ) or pass = false otherwise ( Fail ) . The boolean you pass MUST match the
,→ "## Result " line of your verdict below .
 − Do NOT call exit until s e t _ g r a d i n g _ r e s u l t _ t o o l has been called . If you have already
,→ written your verdict text , still call s e t _ g r a d i n g _ r e s u l t _ t o o l first — a verdict that
,→ is not recorded through s e t _ g r a d i n g _ r e s u l t _ t o o l is counted as a Fail regardless of
,→ your written conclusion , so you must always emit it . Emit it even when you are
,→ highly confident or when the answer seems obvious .
 − Only after s e t _ g r a d i n g _ r e s u l t _ t o o l succeeds , call exit and include the structured
,→ reasoning trace below ( its "## Result " must agree with the pass value you sent ) .

< format >
   # Verification Verdict

  ## Issue / Change Summary
  [2 −3 sentence summary ]

  ## Function Trace Table
  | Function / Method | File : Line | Behavior ( VERIFIED ) |
  | − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − −| − − − − − − − − − − −| − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − −|
  | [ function ]                     | [ file : N ] | [ actual behavior ]                              |

  ## Behavioral Comparison
  [ Concrete scenarios comparing C and C ']

  ## Conversation Alignment
  [ How the verdict accounts for provided conversation context , or " No conversation
,→ context provided "]

  ## Alternative Hypothesis Check
  [ Evidence searched for and found ]

  ## Critical Differences
  [ Behavioral issues or " None identified "]

   ## Result
   [ Pass / Fail ] −− Confidence : [ HIGH / MEDIUM / LOW ]
</ format >




                                                                                 27
