                                            A RTISAN CAD: A N I NDUSTRIAL -L EVEL CAD AGENT WITH
                                                 E XPERT-G ROUNDED K NOWLEDGE D ISTILLATION


                                                       Yunhan Xu1,† Qifeng Wu1,† Xunjin Li4,† Yuanwei Bin2,4,∗                   Qingsong Yao3,∗
                                                         Jianghang Gu4 Guan Wang4 Weihao Lv4 Huiyu Yang4                         Wenfa Luo5,∗
                                                                       Jiao Xiang5 Yuntian Chen2 Shiyi Chen2
                                                                               1
                                                                                 Peking University, Beijing 100871, China
                                                                  2
                                                                    Eastern Institute of Technology, Ningbo 315200, Zhejiang, China
                                                                          3
                                                                            Renmin University of China, Beijing 100872, China
                                                                4
                                                                  TenFong Technology Co., Ltd., Shenzhen 518000, Guangdong, China
                                                                      5
                                                                        IM Motors Technology Co., Ltd., Shanghai 201210, China
                                                                                     †
                                                                                       Equal contribution.




arXiv:2607.05750v1 [cs.AI] 7 Jul 2026
                                            ∗
                                                Corresponding authors: ybin@eitech.edu.cn, qingsongyao@ruc.edu.cn, luowenfa@immotors.com.




                                                                                             A BSTRACT
                                                  Computer-aided design (CAD) for industrial components requires long-horizon procedural modeling,
                                                  robust feature dependencies, editable parametric geometry, and production-grade B-Rep execution.
                                                  Existing text-to-CAD methods have made promising progress in generating CAD programs from
                                                  natural-language descriptions, but they still struggle when user prompts are ambiguous, underspecified,
                                                  or only describe high-level design intent. They also rarely exploit expert procedural knowledge
                                                  naturally available in industrial workflows, such as CATIA operation recordings, macro logs, drawing
                                                  notes, and engineering descriptions. We present A RTISAN CAD , a skill-guided industrial CAD
                                                  agent with expert-grounded knowledge distillation. The core of A RTISAN CAD is CAD intermediate
                                                  representation (CAD-IR), an executable procedural representation that encodes parameters, ordered
                                                  operations, MCP tool bindings, dependencies, generated entities, and verification rules. CAD-IR
                                                  plays two key roles: it first serves as the carrier for distilling expert CAD procedures into reusable
                                                  parameterized skills; then it provides a procedural scaffold that turns vague or intermediate-level
                                                  prompts into complete executable CAD operations. A RTISAN CAD retrieves expert-derived skills,
                                                  instantiates and revises CAD-IR, executes the resulting procedure through a dedicated CATIA-
                                                  MCP backend, and uses multi-view visual feedback for iterative refinement, and finally generates
                                                  production-ready B-Rep models. On the Text2CAD benchmark, CAD-IR improves generation from
                                                  intermediate prompts by reducing mean Chamfer Distance from 14.83 to 9.88, showing its ability
                                                  to bridge ambiguous textual intent and executable CAD construction. On four complex automotive
                                                  components, CAD-IR enables expert CATIA recordings to be distilled into reusable skills, allowing
                                                  A RTISAN CAD to generate editable CATIA-native B-Rep models for new variant requests.

                                        Keywords CAD agent · computer-aided design · industrial design · geometric modeling

                                        1   Introduction
                                        Computer-aided design (CAD) remains one of the most expertise-intensive workflows in modern engineering and
                                        manufacturing. In industrial sectors such as automotive, aerospace, and consumer mechanical product design, engineers
                                        use professional CAD systems such as CATIA, Siemens NX, and Creo to construct editable parametric models with
                                        sketches, references, constraints, features, and named entities [1, 2]. Unlike casual 3D modeling, industrial CAD
                                        authoring is rarely a one-shot shape generation problem. It requires long-horizon procedural modeling, robust feature
                                        dependencies, manufacturability-aware construction, and repeated refinement under part-specific requirements such as
ArtisanCAD


  0. Knowledge Base Construction                                                                                                          Text2CAD Benchmark
                                                                                            Part Skill                                        (Intermediate)
                 Expert Experience                                                                                         29.80
                                                                            Parameters
                     Macro Logs                                               width, length, arch_radius, etc.
                                                                                                                   Mean                   14.16           14.83
                                                         Knowledge                                                 CD ↓                                                  9.88           10.38
                                                                            Checks
                                                         Distillation
                                                                              symmetry             boundary

                                                                              smoothness           etc
                                                                                                                       Text2CAD CAD-Coder                 Ours           Ours           Ref.
                                                                                                                                                         (w/o IR)                     (Expert
                    Drawing notes                                           Template IR                                                                                             description)
                                                                                          Part_IR.json
                                                                                                                              Complex Industrial CAD components
                                                                            Ordered Operations




                                                                                                                     Hinge Reinforcement Plate                         Hood Panel

 1. Ambiguous & Variant Req.         2. Agent Loop with CAD IR              3. CAD Results

                                                    User
          “Hinge reinforcement
                                                   Request
           plate with mounting
                 holes...”                                                                                                Outer Panel Bracket                 Lock Reinforcement Plate

                                               Knowledge Base                                                           Generated CAD Under Variant Requirements
                                                  Retrieval
           ?

                                                 Skill-Guided
                      ?                           IR Rewrite
          ?                                                                                                        "Make the hinge reinforcement tray     "Stretch the hinge reinforcement into a
                                                                                                                     deeper than the original part"                   longer version"
                                                 CAD MCP
       Ambiguous geometry                        Translation      Rewrite
                                                                                     Industrial-complex geometry
       Missing dimension
                                                                                     Requirement-aligned CAD
       Incomplete constraints
                                                  Evaluation                         Production-ready B-Rep
                                                                                                                     "Use a rectangular base on the        "Change the hinge reinforcement into
                                                                                                                   hinge reinforcement part with side-      a version with a circular main body"
                                                                                                                              by-side holes"




Figure 1: Overview of A RTISAN CAD . Expert CATIA recordings and drawing notes are distilled into reusable part skills
with parameters, checks, template CAD-IR, and ordered operations. Given ambiguous variant requests, A RTISAN CAD
retrieves the corresponding skill, rewrites CAD-IR through an agent loop, executes it via CAD-MCP, and produces
evaluated, editable, production-ready B-Rep CAD models.


tolerances, wall thickness, draft constraints, assembly interfaces, and downstream editability. For complex industrial
components, such expertise is accumulated through long-term practice, where engineers learn not only what geometry to
create, but also how to organize references, expose parameters, order operations, and avoid fragile modeling procedures.
Recent progress in large language models has motivated a growing body of AI-driven CAD generation methods. Early
CAD generation works formulate CAD as a structured generative language by modeling sketches, constraints, and sketch-
and-extrude command sequences [3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11]. Recent text-to-CAD systems further map natural-language
descriptions to parametric CAD programs, command sequences, or executable modeling code [12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18].
More recently, CAD agents have explored tool use, program execution, visual feedback, B-Rep grounding, and iterative
correction for more controllable CAD generation [19, 17, 20]. These efforts demonstrate that language models can
provide an intuitive interface between design intent and executable CAD modeling.
However, a substantial gap remains between existing text-to-CAD systems and industrial CAD practice. Current
methods are still largely developed and evaluated on relatively simple parts or short sketch-extrude programs, while real
industrial components require long-horizon procedures with curved B-Rep surfaces, sweeps, splits, datum construction,
hybrid surface-solid operations, reusable references, and editable feature dependencies. In such complex modeling
workflows, experienced engineers possess rich procedural knowledge that directly determines the quality, robustness,
and efficiency of CAD construction. They routinely leave behind macro logs, feature trees, operation histories, parameter
tables, and modeling templates, which encode how to decompose a component, organize references, parameterize
dimensions, order dependent features, and repair modeling failures. Effectively extracting and reusing this knowledge
can benefit industrial CAD generation in two ways: it provides strong procedural priors for producing high-quality,
editable, production-oriented CAD models, and it turns repeated expert operations into reusable skills that can improve
engineers’ productivity [21, 22].
In this paper, we present A RTISAN CAD , an industrial-level CAD agent that generates complex production-oriented
CAD components by grounding CAD generation in expert procedural knowledge. A RTISAN CAD supports an expert
knowledge distillation workflow: expert CATIA operation recordings, macro logs, drawing notes, and engineering
descriptions are parsed into structured modeling procedures, converted into CAD intermediate representation (CAD-IR),


                                                                                        2
ArtisanCAD


Table 1: Comparison with representative accepted text-to-CAD and CAD-agent methods. Unlike prior methods,
A RTISAN CAD explicitly converts expert CAD procedures into executable CAD-IR and reusable skills, and executes
them through an industrial CATIA backend.
 Method                   Venue       Text Input   Visual Feedback       Executable CAD   Expert Macro-to-Skill   Industrial CATIA Backend
 CAD Translator [13]     MM 2024         ✓               ✗                     ✓                   ✗                         ✗
 Text2CAD [12]         NeurIPS 2024      ✓               ✗                     ✓                   ✗                         ✗
 CAD-GPT [15]           AAAI 2025        ✓               ✗                     ✓                   ✗                         ✗
 CAD-LLaMA [14]         CVPR 2025        ✓               ✗                     ✓                   ✗                         ✗
 CADFusion [17]         ICML 2025        ✓               ✓                     ✓                   ✗                         ✗
 CAD-Assistant [19]     ICCV 2025        ✓               ✓                     ✓                   ✗                         ✗
 FutureCAD [20]         ICML 2026        ✓               ✗                     ✓                   ✗                         ✗
 A RTISAN CAD             Ours           ✓               ✓                     ✓                   ✓                         ✓



and further distilled into reusable parameterized skills. During generation, these skills are retrieved and adapted to
user-provided variant requests, enabling the agent to reuse expert operation orders, parameter schemas, and modeling
templates instead of rediscovering an industrial CAD workflow from scratch. A RTISAN CAD is also designed as a
multi-backend CAD agent. Its procedures are represented at the IR level and can be dispatched to different CAD
execution backends; in this work, we implement a dedicated CATIA-MCP backend that maps CAD-IR operations to
CATIA-native commands and produces editable, production-oriented B-Rep models. A lightweight vision feedback
loop further evaluates multi-view renderings of the generated CAD model and rewrites the CAD-IR when visual or
structural inconsistencies are observed.
The core of A RTISAN CAD is CAD-IR, an executable intermediate representation for industrial CAD procedures.
CAD-IR plays two complementary roles. First, it serves as the carrier for expert knowledge distillation: expert macro
recordings are transformed into ordered operations, parameter schemas, backend tool bindings, dependencies, generated
entities, and verification rules, which can then be reused as skill templates. Second, it serves as the procedural scaffold
for ambiguous and variant user requests. Given a request that may only specify high-level changes, CAD-IR allows
the agent to fill missing parameters, preserve expert-derived operation order, instantiate the required MCP tool chain,
and generate a complete executable CAD procedure that satisfies the intended design constraints. This design keeps
planning, expert knowledge reuse, backend execution, and feedback-based repair within a unified representation.
We evaluate A RTISAN CAD on both public text-to-CAD tasks and industrial automotive CAD cases. On the Text2CAD
dataset, we isolate the effect of CAD-IR by disabling the expert skill library and directly generating CAD-IR from
intermediate-level prompts. Even without component-specific expert knowledge, CAD-IR substantially improves
generation quality: compared with direct intermediate-prompt generation, it reduces the mean Chamfer Distance
from 14.83 to 9.88 and improves mean solid IoU from 0.632 to 0.654. This shows that CAD-IR itself provides a
useful procedural scaffold for turning vague textual descriptions into executable CAD operations. Beyond the public
benchmark, we record expert CATIA macro demonstrations for four complex automotive components, distill them into
CAD-IR and reusable skills, and ask experts to provide additional variant requests. The results show that skill-guided
CAD-IR generation can produce CATIA-native editable B-Rep models for these industrial components, while generation
without expert-derived skills fails to complete the long-horizon modeling procedures.
Our contributions are summarized as follows:

       • We propose an expert-to-skill acquisition mechanism for industrial CAD generation. It distills heterogeneous
         expert knowledge, including CATIA operation recordings, macro logs, drawing notes, engineering descriptions,
         and simple CAD instructions, into CAD-IR, an executable intermediate representation with explicit parameters,
         ordered operations, tool bindings, outputs, dependencies, and verification rules. By further abstracting CAD-IR
         into reusable and parameterized CAD skills, the mechanism enables expert modeling procedures to be adapted
         to new variant requests within the same component family.
       • We develop A RTISAN CAD , a skill-guided industrial CAD agent with multi-backend execution support.
         A RTISAN CAD retrieves expert-derived skills, instantiates and revises CAD procedures at the IR level, and
         dispatches executable operations to different CAD backends. In this work, we implement a dedicated CATIA-
         MCP backend for CATIA-native industrial B-Rep modeling and incorporate a lightweight multi-view vision
         feedback loop to refine CAD-IR during iterative generation.
       • We empirically validate A RTISAN CAD on both public text-to-CAD tasks and complex industrial automotive
         components. On the Text2CAD dataset, CAD-IR improves generation performance under intermediate-level
         prompts, showing its effectiveness in bridging vague textual descriptions and executable CAD procedures.
         In addition, we record expert macro demonstrations for four complex automotive parts, convert them into


                                                                     3
ArtisanCAD


         CAD-IR and reusable skills, and demonstrate that A RTISAN CAD can generate industrial-grade CAD models
         through CATIA-MCP.

2     Related work
2.1   Text-Guided CAD Generation and CAD Agents

Learning-based CAD generation has progressively moved from final-shape prediction toward structured procedural
modeling. Early works represent CAD designs as sketches, constraints, graphs, or command sequences, making
CAD history a learnable target rather than treating the final geometry as an isolated 3D shape. SketchGraphs models
relational structures among sketch entities and constraints [3], while Computer-Aided Design as Language serializes
CAD sketches into structured tokens and applies language modeling techniques to sketch generation [4]. Fusion
360 Gallery releases large-scale human design sequences and enables data-driven studies of programmatic CAD
construction [6]. DeepCAD further represents 3D CAD models as sketch-and-extrude command sequences and learns a
Transformer-based generative model [7]. SkexGen improves controllable CAD sequence generation by disentangling
topology, geometry, and extrusion information [8]. These methods establish procedural CAD modeling as a promising
direction, but they are mainly designed for benchmark-scale parametric programs and relatively regular sketch-extrude
geometries.
Recent text-to-CAD methods introduce natural language as a more intuitive interface for CAD generation. Text2CAD
maps textual descriptions to parametric CAD command sequences under different description granularities [12]. CAD
Translator studies translation across CAD-related modalities and representations [13]. CAD-GPT and CAD-LLaMA
explore large language models for generating CAD commands or programs from text [15, 14]. CADFusion further
incorporates multimodal conditioning to improve controllability [17]. Beyond direct sequence or program generation,
recent CAD-agent systems connect language models with executable CAD tools. CAD-Assistant uses multimodal
language models and CAD tool execution for interactive modeling [19], while FutureCAD studies B-Rep-aware CAD
generation from textual queries [20]. These works show that language models can connect design intent with executable
CAD operations, and that tool execution and feedback are useful for improving controllability.
Despite these advances, existing text-guided CAD systems are still far from industrial CAD workflows. Most methods
generate command sequences or CAD programs from text alone and are evaluated on public benchmarks with limited
geometric and procedural complexity. They do not explicitly exploit expert modeling records that naturally exist in
industrial practice, such as macro logs, feature trees, operation histories, parameter tables, and reusable modeling
templates. As a result, they lack a mechanism to transfer human procedural knowledge into new CAD tasks. In contrast,
A RTISAN CAD focuses on expert-grounded industrial CAD generation. It converts natural-language descriptions,
simple CAD instructions, and expert macro demonstrations into executable CAD-IR, distills expert procedures into
reusable parameterized skills, and dispatches the resulting procedures through backend execution layers such as
CATIA-MCP. This allows A RTISAN CAD to reuse human modeling knowledge and target complex production-oriented
B-Rep components rather than only generating isolated benchmark CAD sequences.

3     Method
3.1   Overview

A RTISAN CAD is an IR-centered industrial CAD agent that converts expert procedural knowledge into reusable CAD
skills and uses these skills to generate new CAD variants from user requests. The framework consists of two stages:
expert-to-skill acquisition and skill-guided variant CAD generation. The first stage is an offline knowledge construction
process. Given expert CATIA operation recordings, macro logs, drawing notes, feature trees, and parameter tables,
A RTISAN CAD extracts the modeling procedure of a component family and distills it into a structured part skill. Each
skill contains four key elements: a basic part description, an expert operation order, important parameter schemas
and ranges, and a template CAD-IR. The second stage is an online generation process. Given a user-provided variant
request, A RTISAN CAD retrieves a relevant skill, instantiates its template CAD-IR, executes the generated procedure
through a CAD backend, and revises the IR according to execution and visual feedback.
The key design choice is that A RTISAN CAD does not directly generate backend-specific scripts. Instead, it represents
CAD construction as CAD-IR, an executable intermediate representation that explicitly records the ordered MCP tool
calls, required parameters, operation dependencies, generated entities, and verification rules. This design provides two
practical advantages. First, CAD-IR serves as a common procedural layer between expert demonstrations, language
instructions, and backend execution. Second, CAD-IR allows the agent to revise a CAD procedure at the operation
level rather than rewriting a long backend script from scratch. As a result, skill-guided IR generation provides stronger


                                                           4
ArtisanCAD


procedural guidance, reduces the search space of the agent, and improves robustness for ambiguous or underspecified
industrial CAD requests.

3.2   Expert-to-Skill Acquisition with CAD-IR

The goal of expert-to-skill acquisition is to transform expert modeling experience from one-off CAD records into
reusable procedural knowledge. In industrial CAD workflows, senior engineers’ CATIA operations can be recorded
as macro logs, which directly preserve the executable modeling process behind a part. These recordings capture key
procedural decisions such as sketch construction, reference creation, feature generation, trimming or splitting, parameter
assignment, and export. Therefore, parsing expert CATIA recordings into ordered operations is the core step for
distilling human CAD knowledge into reusable skills.
For each component family, we collect expert experience from CATIA macro recordings, drawing notes, and descriptions.
These heterogeneous records are distilled into a part skill:

                                                  s = Ds , Os , Ps , Zs ,                                              (1)

where Ds denotes the basic information of the component family (including descriptions, symmetry, smoothness, and
boundaries) , Os denotes the expert operation order, Ps denotes the parameter schema and valid ranges, and Zs denotes
the template CAD-IR.

Part description. The part description Ds summarizes the target component family, its functional role, and its major
geometric characteristics. For example, an automotive reinforcement plate skill may describe the base plate, mounting
holes, bending regions, stiffening ribs, boundary flanges, and symmetry constraints that are commonly shared by
different variants of the same component.

Expert operation order. The expert operation order Os captures the modeling sequence extracted from CATIA
macro recordings. A recorded macro is first parsed into low-level operations, and these operations are then grouped
into semantically meaningful stages, such as creating the base sketch, constructing guide curves, sweeping a surface,
trimming or splitting geometry, adding mounting holes, and finalizing visibility or export. This operation order is
not treated as a fixed replay script. Instead, it provides a reusable procedural prior that describes how experts usually
construct this component family. This prior is critical for complex parts because many modeling decisions, such as
which reference to create first and which feature should be delayed until later, are difficult to infer from text alone.

Parameter schema. The parameter schema Ps defines the key editable parameters of the component family. Typical
parameters include width, length, depth, radius, hole number, hole diameter, arc height, flange radius, extrusion length,
and sweep curvature. For each parameter, the skill records its semantic meaning, default value, and valid range when
available. These parameters allow the same expert-derived skill to be adapted to new variant requests without rebuilding
the full CAD procedure from scratch.

Template CAD-IR. The template CAD-IR Zs is the executable procedural template distilled from expert operations.
We define CAD-IR as:
                                        Z = P, T , O, E, V,                                                 (2)
where P is the set of global part parameters, T is the set of required backend tools, O is an ordered list of CAD
operations, E records generated entities and dependency relations, and V contains verification rules. Each operation in
CAD-IR is represented as:

                         oi = id, intent, mcp_calls, arguments, outputs, dependson, verify.                            (3)

Here, intent describes the modeling purpose of the operation, mcp_calls specifies the backend tool chain to be
executed, arguments stores concrete or symbolic parameters, outputs records newly created entities, dependson
defines operation dependencies, and verify specifies execution checks.
In our implementation, this acquisition stage is performed by a code-oriented agent, Codex-xHigh, which parses CATIA
macro recordings and experts’ descriptions and drawing notes into normalized operations, abstracts repeated parameter
patterns, and writes the resulting skill and template CAD-IR. The generated template is then validated by replaying the
corresponding MCP tool chain. This process converts expert demonstrations from one-off macro scripts into reusable,
parameterized, and executable CAD skills.


                                                            5
ArtisanCAD


 Skill-Guided Variant CAD Generation

      Ambiguous and Variant Request                                              Skill-guided IR Rewrite                                                       Multi-view Visual Evaluation Loop

             User Query: “I need a hinge                                     Agent: The current depth is controlled by
                                                                             the distance along the Z-axis between
             reinforcement plate deeper                                      sketch_1 and sketch_2. You need to                              “Inspect rendered variant views against the target request,
                                                                             modify translate_z1: change it from -20mm                       which should be 1.5x deeper while keeping the footprint, two
             than the original part.”                                        to how much?                                                    holes, upper flange, and main outline consistent. Return
                                                                                                                                             PASS/FAIL, visible errors, likely failed step, and IR correction
                                                                             User Query: “1.5x the original depth, and                       hints.”
                                                                             keep other features unchanged.”
      Knowledge Base Skill Retrieval

                                                          • Adapt to request                            • Order operations
                                                          • Fill parameters                             • Satisfy constrains




  SKILL.MD                                            HRPLATE.IR.JSON


  • Model or modify a hinge reinforcement             {

  plate.                                                  "part": {
                                                          "name": "Hinge Reinforcement Plate",
  • Part Description                                                                                                                              Unified MCP
                                                          “parameters”: {“tray_depth”: -20,"fillet_r": 5,"hole_radius": 3,"thickness": 1}                                               CAD Generation
  Recessed tray, two mounting holes, side walls,
                                                          },
                                                                                                                                                Translation Layer
  upper flange, fillets, and sheet-metal thickness.       "tools": ["sketch", "fill", "translate", "loft", "fillet", "split", "thicken"],
  • Reference IR                                          "operations": [                                                                   • MCP calls:
  References ir.json defines parameters, MCP               "sketch profiles",                                                                 create_loft_surface,
  calls, dependencies, and operation order.                "build surfaces",                                                                  split_surface,
  • Completion Check                                       "add fillets",
                                                                                                                                              thicken_surface, …
                                                           "cut holes",
  Final solid visible; key features present;
                                                           "thicken solid",]                                                                • Multiple backends:
  CATPart/STEP saved; visual review passed.
                                                      }                                                                                       CATIA, Freecad, …




Figure 2: Overview of the skill-guided variant CAD generation framework. Given an ambiguous or variant user
request, A RTISAN CAD retrieves an expert-derived part skill, instantiates and rewrites a structured CAD-IR, translates
the IR into backend-specific MCP calls for CAD execution, and uses multi-view visual feedback to iteratively refine the
IR until the generated CAD variant satisfies the target request.


3.3        Skill-Guided Variant CAD Generation

Given a user-provided variant request R, A RTISAN CAD generates a new CAD model by adapting an expert-derived
skill rather than constructing the entire procedure from scratch. A variant request refers to a new requirement within the
same component family, such as changing the depth, width, curvature, hole layout, local reinforcement structure, or
boundary shape of an existing part. The online generation stage contains skill matching, CAD-IR instantiation, backend
execution, and vision-guided IR rewriting, as illustrated in Figure 2.

3.3.1        Skill Matching and CAD-IR Instantiation
Given an ambiguous or variant user request R, the key challenge is to convert incomplete design intent into a complete
and executable CAD procedure. A request such as “draw a deeper hinge reinforcement plate with mounting holes”
usually specifies only high-level changes, but leaves many modeling details unspecified, including the base construction
sequence, reference entities, parameter dependencies, operation order, and verification rules. A RTISAN CAD addresses
this problem by grounding IR generation in expert-derived skills.
The agent first retrieves the most relevant skill from the skill knowledge base K:
                                                                                                   s⋆ = Retrieve(R, K).                                                                                         (4)
The retrieved skill provides a component-level modeling prior, including the expected part structure, expert operation
order, parameter schema, and template CAD-IR. Conditioned on this skill, the agent interprets the variant request
as a set of structured IR edits rather than generating a CAD program from scratch. Specifically, it identifies which
parameters should be changed, which local operations should be inserted or modified, which constraints should be
preserved, and which expert operation order should remain unchanged.
The initial CAD-IR for the new variant is obtained by instantiating the template IR:
                                                                                    Z ∗ 0 = Instantiate(Z ∗ s⋆ , R),                                                                                            (5)
where Zs⋆ is the template CAD-IR stored in the retrieved skill. This instantiation process fills missing parameters, adapts
geometric dimensions, updates operation arguments, orders the required MCP tool calls, and preserves dependencies


                                                                                                                                 6
ArtisanCAD


and verification rules. In this way, the skill acts as a procedural scaffold: it turns an underspecified request into a
complete CAD-IR with executable operations, valid references, and checkable outputs.
In our implementation, skill matching, CAD-IR instantiation, and subsequent IR rewriting are performed by Mimo-v2.5-
Pro. The model is prompted with the variant request, the retrieved skill, the parameter schema, the template CAD-IR,
and any available execution or visual feedback. It outputs either a complete instantiated CAD-IR or a structured IR
patch that modifies selected parameters, operations, dependencies, or verification rules. This skill-guided formulation
improves generation efficiency and robustness because the agent only needs to adapt an expert-derived procedure to the
requested variant, rather than rediscovering the full industrial CAD workflow from an ambiguous prompt.

3.3.2    Backend Execution with CAD-MCP
After IR instantiation, A RTISAN CAD dispatches the generated CAD-IR to a backend execution layer. The execution
layer reads the ordered operations in Zt and translates each operation into backend-specific MCP tool calls:
                                                 et , M ∗ t = Exec ∗ MCP(Zt ),                                           (6)
where Mt is the generated CAD model and et contains execution status, error messages, produced entities, and
diagnostic information.
In this work, we implement a CATIA-MCP backend for CATIA-native industrial CAD construction. The backend
supports the tool chain required by our evaluated automotive components, including part creation, hybrid body
construction, sketch creation, profile construction, sweep, extrusion, datum creation, split, visibility control, saving, and
export. CATIA-MCP is not designed as a standalone algorithmic contribution. Its role is to provide a reliable industrial
execution interface for CAD-IR, enabling A RTISAN CAD to generate editable B-Rep models in a production CAD
environment.

3.3.3    Vision Feedback and IR Rewrite
Execution feedback alone cannot guarantee that the generated model satisfies the user’s visual and geometric intent.
Therefore, A RTISAN CAD uses a lightweight vision feedback loop to refine CAD-IR. After backend execution, the
system exports canonical multi-view renderings of the current model:

                               It = Itf ront , Itback , Itlef t , Itright , Ittop , Itbottom , Itiso1 , Itiso2 .         (7)
These eight views are merged into a visual board and provided to Mimo-v2.5-Pro together with the variant request,
the retrieved skill, and a summary of the current CAD-IR. The model returns visual feedback vt describing missing
structures, incorrect proportions, violated visual constraints, or failed modeling intentions.
The agent then revises the CAD-IR rather than directly editing backend-specific scripts:
                                                 Zt+1 = Rewrite(Zt , R, et , vt ).                                       (8)
The rewrite may update parameter values, modify operation arguments, insert missing operations, remove invalid steps,
or adjust dependencies while preserving the overall expert-derived operation structure. The updated IR is executed
again through the backend. This loop continues until the generated model passes the visual evaluation or reaches the
maximum refinement budget.

4     Experiments
We evaluate A RTISAN CAD from two complementary perspectives. First, we use the public Text2CAD benchmark to
test whether CAD-IR can improve generation from simple and intermediate-level text prompts without using any expert
knowledge base. Second, we evaluate A RTISAN CAD on industrial automotive components, where expert CATIA
macro recordings are converted into reusable skills and used to generate new design variants requested by CAD experts.
In both settings, the final outputs of A RTISAN CAD are executed through CATIA-MCP and exported as editable B-Rep
CAD models.

4.1     Evaluation on the Public Text2CAD Benchmark

Setting. We first evaluate A RTISAN CAD on the public Text2CAD dataset. This experiment is designed to isolate the
benefit of CAD-IR itself. Therefore, we do not use any expert macro logs, industrial skill library, or component-specific
knowledge base for this benchmark. Given an intermediate-level text prompt, A RTISAN CAD directly generates


                                                                      7
ArtisanCAD


Table 2: Results on 100 randomly sampled intermediate-level prompts from the Text2CAD benchmark. A RTISAN CAD
directly generates CAD-IR from intermediate prompts without using an expert skill library. All A RTISAN CAD outputs
are executed through CATIA-MCP and exported as editable B-Rep CAD models.

  Method                            Prompt Level     Valid / Total   CD Mean ↓     CD Median ↓      Solid IoU Mean ↑
  A RTISAN CAD w/o IR (expert)          Expert         100/100         10.38            0.96              0.662
  Text2CAD                           Intermediate       96/100         29.80           10.19              0.446
  CAD-Coder                          Intermediate      100/100         14.16           3.47               0.585
  A RTISAN CAD w/o IR                Intermediate      100/100         14.83           2.45               0.614
  A RTISAN CAD                       Intermediate      100/100         9.88            2.12               0.646


CAD-IR, executes the resulting procedure through CATIA-MCP, and exports the generated model as a CATIA-native
B-Rep model. We randomly sample 100 test cases from the intermediate-prompt split for evaluation.
This setting is intentionally challenging because intermediate prompts are often ambiguous: they describe the target
geometry at a coarse semantic level but omit many low-level construction details, such as exact operation order,
reference selection, and parameter dependencies. The goal is to test whether CAD-IR can serve as a useful procedural
scaffold that improves generation quality even without expert-derived skills.

Baselines.   We compare A RTISAN CAD with representative text-to-CAD baselines and internal variants:
       • Text2CAD: the original text-to-CAD baseline that maps textual descriptions to CAD command sequences [12].
       • CAD-Coder: a code-generation baseline for producing executable CAD procedures from text [16].
       • A RTISAN CAD w/o IR: an ablated version that directly generates CAD operations from the intermediate
         prompt without using CAD-IR as an explicit intermediate representation.
       • A RTISAN CAD w/o IR (expert): an upper-reference setting where the model receives expert-level descriptions
         instead of intermediate prompts, but still does not use CAD-IR.
       • A RTISAN CAD : our full public-benchmark setting, where the model receives only intermediate prompts and
         directly generates executable CAD-IR.

Metrics. We evaluate both executability and geometric fidelity. For executability, we report the number of valid
outputs among 100 generated samples. For geometric fidelity, we follow common text-to-CAD evaluation protocols
and report Chamfer Distance CD × 103 [23] and solid IoU at resolution 323 . Lower CD indicates better surface-level
geometry matching, while higher solid IoU indicates better volumetric consistency. For A RTISAN CAD , all metrics are
computed after executing the generated CAD-IR in CATIA and exporting the resulting B-Rep model.

Results and analysis. As shown in Table 2, CAD-IR substantially improves intermediate-level text-to-CAD generation.
Compared with A RTISAN CAD w/o IR under the same intermediate-prompt setting, A RTISAN CAD reduces CD mean
from 14.83 to 9.88 and improves solid IoU mean from 0.614 to 0.646. This indicates that CAD-IR provides useful
procedural structure even when no expert skills are available. Compared with external baselines, A RTISAN CAD
achieves consistent gains under the intermediate-prompt setting. It improves CD Mean by 66.8% over Text2CAD and
30.2% over CAD-Coder, while improving Solid IoU Mean from 0.446 and 0.585 to 0.646, respectively. This indicates
that CAD-IR provides a stronger procedural scaffold for translating ambiguous intermediate prompts into executable
CAD procedures.
More importantly, A RTISAN CAD with intermediate prompts reaches a performance level close to the expert-description
setting. Although A RTISAN CAD only receives intermediate prompts, its CD mean is even lower than that of A RTISAN -
CAD w/o IR (expert), and its solid IoU mean remains competitive. This suggests that CAD-IR can partially bridge the
gap between vague textual descriptions and expert-level procedural CAD construction. The result supports our central
claim: representing CAD generation as an explicit executable IR can improve both robustness and geometry quality,
even before introducing expert-derived skills.

Qualitative visualization. Fig. 3 provides representative visual examples that complement the quantitative results.
Compared with the two external baselines, A RTISAN CAD produces more faithful CAD structures under the intermediate-
prompt setting. Unlike expert prompts, intermediate prompts do not provide a detailed modeling procedure, reference
construction strategy, feature order, or explicit operation decomposition. Without such step-by-step procedural guidance,
Text2CAD and CAD-Coder often fail to infer a complete CAD construction process: they recover only a coarse


                                                           8
ArtisanCAD


      Ground Truth         Text2CAD            CAD-Coder           ArtisanCAD          ArtisanCAD           ArtisanCAD
                                                                     w/o IR               w/o IR
                                                                                         (expert)




Figure 3: Qualitative comparison on representative Text2CAD samples. Each row shows one target shape, and each
column compares the ground truth with Text2CAD, CAD-Coder, A RTISAN CAD without CAD-IR, A RTISAN CAD
without CAD-IR using expert descriptions, and the full A RTISAN CAD . The visual results show that CAD-IR helps
preserve important part-level structures and local details under intermediate prompts.


bounding shape, while missing functional details such as through holes, local cutouts, branching surfaces, and thin
supporting members. For example, in the table-like sample in the last row, Text2CAD and CAD-Coder produce bulky
or collapsed solids rather than a recognizable table structure. By contrast, A RTISAN CAD reconstructs a flat tabletop
with four slender legs and preserves the spatial relationship between the supports and the top plate.
The benefit of CAD-IR is further illustrated by the comparison between A RTISAN CAD and its non-IR variant. Because
CAD-IR explicitly represents parameters, ordered operations, dependencies, and verification rules, it helps the agent
infer the missing procedural information that is not stated in intermediate prompts. This effect is visible in the second,
third, and fifth rows. In the second row, A RTISAN CAD w/o IR degenerates to a simple prism-like body, whereas the full
A RTISAN CAD recovers the branched profile and asymmetric extension visible in the target. In the third row, CAD-IR
helps preserve the local slot/cutout structure and the overall part orientation, while the non-IR variant produces a less
faithful block-like shape. In the fifth row, the non-IR result separates the object into coarse disconnected blocks, but the
full A RTISAN CAD reconstructs the tabletop and supporting legs as a coherent CAD part. These examples suggest that
CAD-IR does not merely improve global shape similarity; it provides an operation-level scaffold that helps the agent
preserve functional details and compose them into editable CAD structures.


4.2   Industrial Evaluation on Automotive CAD Components

Setting. The second experiment evaluates whether expert-derived skills can support industrial CAD generation. We
select four relatively complex automotive components from real vehicle CAD workflows. For each component, expert
engineers operate CATIA to construct the part, and we record the corresponding macro logs and engineering notes.


                                                             9
ArtisanCAD


                          "Give me a hood panel with a higher arch.   "Create a flat hood panel. Flatten the arch     " Generate a narrower hood panel while        "Make a wider hood panel variant with a
        Hood Panel
                            Keep the same main profile length."           while keeping the main profile."          preserving the original overall curved form.              broader surface."
                                                                                                                                         "




                           "Change the hinge reinforcement into a     "Make the hinge reinforcement tray deeper        "Use a rectangular base on the hinge          "Stretch the hinge reinforcement into a
   Hinge Reinforcement
                             version with a circular main body."               than the original part."                reinforcement part with side-by-side                      longer version."
                                                                                                                                     holes."




                            "Extend the outer panel bracket so the    "Replace the rectangular top openings with     "Make the outer panel bracket legs more       "Add large hollow side cutouts to the outer
    Outer Panel Bracket
                                   bridge span is longer."             round holes on the outer panel bracket."             symmetric and thinner."                             panel bracket."




                          "Make a lock plate variant with the outer      "Change the lock plate so the center        "Make the lock plate slimmer by making        "Create a lock plate variant with a squarer
        Lock Plate
                                 flange and holes larger."                 openings become rectangular."                the reinforcement ribs thinner."                        outer footprint."




Figure 4: Industrial variant generation with expert-derived skills. Each row corresponds to one automotive component
family, where the first column shows the original expert-modeled part and the remaining columns show new variants
generated from expert-provided variant requests. A RTISAN CAD adapts the corresponding skill by modifying parameters
and local operations in CAD-IR, and executes the resulting procedure through CATIA-MCP to produce editable B-Rep
CAD models.


Each macro group is then converted into a part-specific skill through the expert-to-skill acquisition pipeline described in
Sec. 4. In total, we obtain four expert-derived skills, one for each component family.
Each skill contains a part description, an expert operation order, a parameter schema, and a template CAD-IR. The
template CAD-IR stores the ordered MCP tool chain, required parameters, operation dependencies, generated entities,
and verification rules. During evaluation, CAD experts provide additional variant requests for each component family.
These requests modify dimensions, depths, hole layouts, local reinforcements, curvature, or boundary shapes while
preserving the high-level component identity. Given a variant request, A RTISAN CAD retrieves the corresponding skill,
instantiates the template CAD-IR, executes it through CATIA-MCP, and refines the IR using the vision feedback loop.
In the ablation study, we try to directly generate four complex automotive components without CAD-IR.

Results. Fig. 4 shows qualitative results on four automotive component families. Given expert-provided variant
requests, such as changing the arch height, width, depth, hole layout, base shape, cutout structure, flange size, or
reinforcement ribs, A RTISAN CAD successfully adapts the corresponding expert-derived skill and generates executable
CAD-IR for each new variant. The generated IR preserves the expert operation structure while modifying only the
required parameters and local operations, and can be executed through CATIA-MCP to produce editable CATIA-native
B-Rep models. In contrast, without skill-guided CAD-IR, the agent fails on these industrial components because
it cannot reliably infer the long-horizon operation order, valid references, and parameter dependencies from short
variant requests alone. This demonstrates that CAD-IR is essential for transferring expert modeling knowledge to new
production-oriented CAD variants.

Analysis. This experiment demonstrates the practical value of expert-to-skill acquisition. For complex industrial
components, the main difficulty is not only selecting individual CAD commands, but also knowing the correct procedural
structure: which references to build, how to order dependent operations, which parameters should remain editable, and
how to preserve valid feature dependencies. Expert macro recordings provide this missing procedural knowledge. By
distilling them into CAD-IR and reusable skills, A RTISAN CAD can reuse expert modeling experience to generate new
component variants.
The contrast between the two settings also highlights the role of skills in industrial CAD generation. A general-purpose
CAD agent with access to CATIA tools is insufficient when the task requires long operation chains and domain-specific


                                                                                               10
ArtisanCAD


modeling conventions. Expert-derived skills make the problem tractable by providing a structured template that the
agent can adapt rather than rediscover. Together with CATIA-MCP execution and vision-based IR rewriting, this
enables A RTISAN CAD to move from public benchmark-style text-to-CAD generation toward production-oriented CAD
automation.

5   Conclusion
We presented A RTISAN CAD , a skill-guided industrial CAD agent that uses CAD-IR as an executable intermediate
representation for expert-grounded CAD generation. CAD-IR serves both as a carrier for distilling expert CATIA
recordings and engineering notes into reusable parameterized skills, and as a procedural scaffold for converting
ambiguous or intermediate-level prompts into complete executable CAD operations. Through skill retrieval, IR
instantiation, CATIA-MCP execution, and multi-view vision feedback, A RTISAN CAD generates editable, production-
ready B-Rep models for new variant requests. Experiments on the Text2CAD benchmark show that CAD-IR improves
intermediate-prompt generation, while industrial experiments on four complex automotive components demonstrate
that expert-derived skills are essential for scaling CAD agents toward practical production workflows.

Acknowledgments
Acknowledgments will be added in the final version.

References
 [1] Jami J Shah and Martti Mäntylä. Parametric and feature-based CAD/CAM: concepts, techniques, and applications.
     John Wiley & Sons, 1995.
 [2] Jorge D Camba, Manuel Contero, and Pedro Company. Parametric cad modeling: An analysis of strategies for
     design reusability. Computer-aided design, 74:18–31, 2016.
 [3] Ari Seff, Yaniv Ovadia, Wenda Zhou, and Ryan P Adams. Sketchgraphs: A large-scale dataset for modeling
     relational geometry in computer-aided design. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.08506, 2020.
 [4] Yaroslav Ganin, Sergey Bartunov, Yujia Li, Ethan Keller, and Stefano Saliceti. Computer-aided design as language.
     Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:5885–5897, 2021.
 [5] Wamiq Para, Shariq Bhat, Paul Guerrero, Tom Kelly, Niloy Mitra, Leonidas J Guibas, and Peter Wonka. Sketchgen:
     Generating constrained cad sketches. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:5077–5088, 2021.
 [6] Karl DD Willis, Yewen Pu, Jieliang Luo, Hang Chu, Tao Du, Joseph G Lambourne, Armando Solar-Lezama,
     and Wojciech Matusik. Fusion 360 gallery: A dataset and environment for programmatic cad construction from
     human design sequences. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 40(4):1–24, 2021.
 [7] Rundi Wu, Chang Xiao, and Changxi Zheng. Deepcad: A deep generative network for computer-aided design
     models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pages 6772–6782, 2021.
 [8] Xiang Xu, Karl DD Willis, Joseph G Lambourne, Chin-Yi Cheng, Pradeep Kumar Jayaraman, and Yasutaka
     Furukawa. Skexgen: Autoregressive generation of cad construction sequences with disentangled codebooks. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2207.04632, 2022.
 [9] Changjian Li, Hao Pan, Adrien Bousseau, and Niloy J Mitra. Free2cad: Parsing freehand drawings into cad
     commands. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 41(4):1–16, 2022.
[10] Gopal Sharma, Rishabh Goyal, Difan Liu, Evangelos Kalogerakis, and Subhransu Maji. Csgnet: Neural shape
     parser for constructive solid geometry. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
     recognition, pages 5515–5523, 2018.
[11] R Kenny Jones, Theresa Barton, Xianghao Xu, Kai Wang, Ellen Jiang, Paul Guerrero, Niloy J Mitra, and Daniel
     Ritchie. Shapeassembly: Learning to generate programs for 3d shape structure synthesis. ACM Transactions on
     Graphics (TOG), 39(6):1–20, 2020.
[12] Mohammad S Khan, Sankalp Sinha, Talha U Sheikh, Didier Stricker, Sk A Ali, and Muhammad Z Afzal. Text2cad:
     Generating sequential cad designs from beginner-to-expert level text prompts. Advances in Neural Information
     Processing Systems, 37:7552–7579, 2024.
[13] Xueyang Li, Yu Song, Yunzhong Lou, and Xiangdong Zhou. Cad translator: An effective drive for text to 3d
     parametric computer-aided design generative modeling. In Proceedings of the 32nd ACM International Conference
     on Multimedia, pages 8461–8470, 2024.


                                                         11
ArtisanCAD


[14] Jiahao Li, Weijian Ma, Xueyang Li, Yunzhong Lou, Guichun Zhou, and Xiangdong Zhou. Cad-llama: leveraging
     large language models for computer-aided design parametric 3d model generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
     Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 18563–18573, 2025.
[15] Siyu Wang, Cailian Chen, Xinyi Le, Qimin Xu, Lei Xu, Yanzhou Zhang, and Jie Yang. Cad-gpt: Synthesising cad
     construction sequence with spatial reasoning-enhanced multimodal llms. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference
     on Artificial Intelligence, volume 39, pages 7880–7888, 2025.
[16] Yandong Guan, Xilin Wang, Ximing Xing, Jing Zhang, Dong Xu, and Qian Yu. Cad-coder: Text-to-cad
     generation with chain-of-thought and geometric reward. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
     38:59765–59789, 2026.
[17] Ruiyu Wang, Yu Yuan, Shizhao Sun, and Jiang Bian. Text-to-cad generation through infusing visual feedback in
     large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.19054, 2025.
[18] Haoyang Xie and Feng Ju. Text-to-cadquery: A new paradigm for cad generation with scalable large model
     capabilities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.06507, 2025.
[19] Dimitrios Mallis, Ahmet Serda Karadeniz, Sebastian Cavada, Danila Rukhovich, Niki Foteinopoulou, Kseniya
     Cherenkova, Anis Kacem, and Djamila Aouada. Cad-assistant: tool-augmented vllms as generic cad task solvers.
     In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pages 7284–7294, 2025.
[20] Jiahao Li, Qingwang Zhang, Qiuyu Chen, Guozhan Qiu, Yunzhong Lou, and Xiangdong Zhou. Towards high-
     fidelity cad generation via llm-driven program generation and text-based b-rep primitive grounding. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2603.11831, 2026.
[21] Jingwei Ni, Yihao Liu, Xinpeng Liu, Yutao Sun, Mengyu Zhou, Pengyu Cheng, Dexin Wang, Erchao Zhao, Xiaoxi
     Jiang, and Guanjun Jiang. Trace2skill: Distill trajectory-local lessons into transferable agent skills. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2603.25158, 2026.
[22] Peng Xia, Jianwen Chen, Hanyang Wang, Jiaqi Liu, Kaide Zeng, Yu Wang, Siwei Han, Yiyang Zhou, Xujiang
     Zhao, Haifeng Chen, et al. Skillrl: Evolving agents via recursive skill-augmented reinforcement learning. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2602.08234, 2026.
[23] Haoqiang Fan, Hao Su, and Leonidas J Guibas. A point set generation network for 3d object reconstruction from a
     single image. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 605–613,
     2017.




                                                           12
