                                        UniClawBench: A Universal Benchmark for Proactive
                                                  Agents on Real-World Tasks


                                                          Zhekai Chen1∗ Chengqi Duan1∗ Kaiyue Sun1∗ Bohao Li1                                                                                                                             Yuqing Wang1
                                                                              Manyuan Zhang2† Xihui Liu1†
                                                                              1
                                                                                HKU MMLab 2 Meituan

                                                                What we evaluate                                                                      How we evaluate                                                                               What we find
                                           400 tasks covering 5 core capabilities in real-world scenarios                              Three-role Closed-loop Evaluation Strategy                                                      Capability performance (Pass Rate ↑)
                                                                                                                                                                Example Task
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Skill Usage
                                                 Multimodal                               Long Context
                                                 Understand information                   Integrate and track
                                                 grounded in images,                      evidence across diverse
                                                 videos and audio.                        sources and long context.                          Capture
                                                                                                                        Watch video                             Read photo      Write steps.md      Write list.md
                                          Example:                              Example:                                                   screenshots
                                            Video-Grounded Cooking Steps          Email Fraud Audit
                                                                                                                                                    Trajectories & Artifacts                                                                                                                 Exploration
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Cross Platform


                                                                                                                               Executor Agent                                            User Simulator

                                                                                                                           Execute the task with                                   Simulate a real user who
                                          YouTube Video       Input photo                                                                                                             reviews trajectories,
                                                                                                                            provided sources in a




arXiv:2607.08768v1 [cs.CL] 9 Jul 2026
                                                                                                                             real-world setting,                                   artifacts, and supervisor’s
                                                                                                                           generating trajectories                                  signal to provide natural
                                                 Skill Usage                              Exploration
                                                                                                                                and artifacts.                                              feedback.
                                                 Inspect, select, and                     Actively explore uncertain                                              Multi-turn
                                                 operate task-specific                                                                                            Interaction                                                       Multimodal                                     Long Context
                                                                                          environments and                   Agent Workspace & Tools
                                                                                                                                                                                     “align filenames and steps,
                                                 skills                                   discover the solution path.                                                               and ensure the shopping list               GPT-5.4 + OpenClaw     Claude Opus-4.8 + OpenClaw      Kimi-2.6 + OpenClaw
                                          Example:                                 Example:                                                                                             includes all items……”                  GPT-5.4 + EDICT        Claude Opus-4.8 + EDICT         Kimi-2.6 + EDICT
                                                                                                                        Browser GUI Apps   File   Other Tools
                                          Boarding Pass Parsing via OCR Skill        Trace a chart to its source                                                                                                               GPT-5.4 + Nanobot      Claude Opus-4.8 + Nanobot       Kimi-2.6 + Nanobot


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Normalized Pass Rate on UniClawBench
                                                                                                                             Trajectories &                      Feedback                         Coarse
                                                                                                                                Artifacts                                                     progress signal


                                                                                                                                                                Hidden Resources                     Score: 0.69                 Framework: OpenClaw                         Model: Claude Opus-4.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Status: failed
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Recoverable: True
                                                  Cross-Platform coordinate actions across multiple platforms                                             References   Evaluation Rule            Verdict: Continue        -    Framework choice consistently impacts capability
                                                                      to complete a unified objective
                                                                                                                                -     evaluates trajectories and artifacts against hidden                                       performance more than model choice.
                                          Example: Cross-App Literature Workflow
                                                                                                                                      references and rubrics                                                               -    Long-context and multimodal tasks emerges as the major
                                                                                                                                -     determines whether the task passes, fails, or continues.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                bottlenecks.
                                                                                                                                                           Supervisor Agent




                                        Figure 1: Overview of UniClawBench. UniClawBench consists of 400 bilingual real-world tasks
                                        spanning 5 core capabilities: multimodal, long-context, skill usage, exploration, and cross-platform.
                                        We propose a three-role closed-loop evaluation framework, where an executor agent performs tasks
                                        in real environments, a supervisor evaluates trajectories and artifacts using hidden rubrics, and a
                                        user simulator provides natural feedback based on executor’s performance and supervisor’s signal,
                                        enabling multi-turn interaction. We conduct two sets of experiments to evaluate cross-model and
                                        cross-framework performance. The capability-level results reveal that framework choice exerts a
                                        stronger influence than model choice.

                                                                                                                                                     Abstract
                                                           The rapid development of large language models and multimodal large language
                                                           models has accelerated the emergence of proactive agents capable of operating
                                                           everyday tools and assisting users in real-world environments. However, existing
                                                           benchmarks struggle to evaluate such agents effectively, as they often rely on
                                                           sandboxed environments and single-turn evaluation paradigms. Moreover, their
                                                           scenario-based task taxonomies mix multiple model capabilities within the same
                                                           task category, making it difficult to identify the root causes of agent failures. To
                                                           address these limitations, we introduce UniClawBench, the first capability-driven
                                                           benchmark designed to evaluate proactive agents in dynamic, real-world settings.
                                                           UniClawBench is built around five foundational model capabilities: Skill Usage,
                                                           Exploration, Long-Context Reasoning, Multimodal Understanding, and Cross-
                                                           Platform Coordination. Based on these capabilities, we design 400 bilingual real-
                                                           world tasks. Unlike previous benchmarks that rely on static, pre-recorded answers,
                                                           our benchmark evaluates agents in live Docker containers using fine-grained, step-
                                                           by-step completion checkpoints. Furthermore, we design a closed-loop evaluation
                                           ∗ Equal contribution, listed alphabetically
                                           † Corresponding Author



                                        Preprint.
         strategy comprising an executor agent, a hidden supervisor agent, and a user
         agent to simulate realistic multi-turn human feedback without leaking grading
         criteria. To disentangle base model capabilities from framework-level design
         choices, we evaluate state-of-the-art models under multiple agent frameworks.
         Through comprehensive comparisons across both models and frameworks, we
         show how base model capabilities and agent framework designs jointly shape
         performance in real-world environments. To facilitate future research, we make our
         benchmark and code publicly available at https://github.com/HKU-MMLab/
         UniClawBench.


1   Introduction
Large language models and multimodal large language models have evolved from text-centric
assistants into autonomous agents capable of executing complex, multi-step tasks in real-world
environments [48, 36]. This evolution has given rise to proactive agents, which assist user by directly
control everyday tools like browsers and terminals. Representative platforms such as OpenClaw [39]
and Nanobot [35] have moved beyond isolated task execution toward 24-7 personal assistance,
effectively serving as digital coworkers that handle the full spectrum of daily work. These agents are
tasked with navigating complex, real-world scenarios that span multiple modalities and platforms.
This rapid evolution raises a pressing question: How can we systematically measure their true
capabilities in real-world settings?
Significant efforts have been devoted to building agent benchmarks [20, 26]. However, we identify
three structural limitations that prevent them from adequately evaluating modern proactive agents.
First, existing benchmarks struggle to capture real-world complexity. They often rely on self-hosted
website mirrors (e.g., WebArena [53]) or cached pages within virtual machines (e.g., OSWorld [45]),
creating a profound gap between sandboxed performance and actual real-world capabilities. Second,
they mostly leverage a single-turn evaluation paradigm, completely ignoring the closed-loop nature
of human-agent interaction where users frequently provide iterative feedback. Finally, and most
critically, existing benchmarks organize tasks by application scenario (e.g., “office”, “research”). This
approach conflates fundamentally different abilities. When a model fails an “office” task, it is unclear
whether the bottleneck lies in visual perception, long-context reasoning, or tool usage. Consequently,
a capability-driven benchmark is urgently needed to pinpoint the precise source of failure.
However, building a benchmark that operates in real-world environments and incorporates closed-
loop user interaction introduces two fundamental challenges. The first is the lack of a stable ground
truth. The expected outputs in sandboxed benchmarks are fixed when the benchmark is created, but
this assumption becomes fragile in unpredictable real-world scenarios. For example, an Amazon
product page may list the same product at $199 today and $179 tomorrow, making a pre-recorded
answer quickly outdated. The second challenge lies in faithfully simulating user interaction without
compromising evaluation reliability. To create a faithful closed-loop environment, an automated user
simulator must dynamically provide natural corrections based on the agent’s intermediate outputs.
However, if this simulator is granted access to the underlying ground truth or grading criteria to
guide the agent, it risks inadvertently leaking the solution or evaluation rules to the agent under
test. Balancing natural, multi-turn human feedback with strict information isolation to prevent data
contamination remains a significant technical challenge.
In this paper, we introduce UniClawBench, the first capability-driven benchmark designed to evaluate
proactive agents in dynamic real-world environments. UniClawBench systematically decomposes
tasks along five foundational capability dimensions: Skill Usage, Exploration, Long Context, Multi-
modal, and Cross-Platform. To ensure comprehensive coverage, we manually design 400 bilingual
tasks (English and Chinese) that encompass a wide range of authentic daily usage scenarios. All
tasks run inside Docker containers equipped with real software, live browsers and local file systems.
UniClawBench introduces two novel assessment mechanisms. First, to address the dynamic nature of
live environments where stable ground truth is absent, we abandon pre-recorded answers. Instead, we
design fine-grained, step-by-step completion checkpoints for each task. This empowers an automated
supervisor with hidden evaluation criteria, ensuring it knows precisely which intermediate reasoning
and execution evidence to assess at each step. Second, to solve the information-isolation paradox,
UniClawBench implements a strict three-role closed-loop evaluation that acts as an information
firewall. A hidden supervisor privately checks the agent’s progress, while a user simulator responds
only to the visible trajectory and a coarse progress signal. This setup lets UniClawBench capture
realistic multi-turn interactions without revealing the underlying answers or grading criteria.


                                                   2
We conduct two groups of experiments to benchmark cross-model and cross-framework performance.
First, we evaluate a wide range of state-of-the-art models under OpenClaw framework, which allows
us to isolate differences in base model capabilities. Second, we evaluate representative models across
three agent frameworks: OpenClaw [39], EDICT [6] and Nanobot [35]. This allows us to study how
framework design affect performance on different tasks. Together, these comparisons reveal not only
which models are more capable, but also how different agent architectures amplify or limit these
capabilities in complex real-world tasks.
In summary, our main contributions are as follows:
       • We introduce UniClawBench, the first capability-driven benchmark that evaluates proactive
         agents in dynamic real-world environments. UniClawBench is built around five foundational
         capabilities, based on which we manually design 400 bilingual tasks to diagnose the root
         causes of agent failures.
       • We propose a closed-loop evaluation strategy that better reflects real-world user-agent
         interaction. It introduces a three-role design with an executor agent, a hidden supervisor
         agent, and a user simulator agent, enabling multi-turn feedback while preventing answer or
         grading-criteria leakage.
       • We evaluate state-of-the-art models across multiple agent frameworks. This joint analy-
         sis reveals how base model capabilities and framework designs each contribute to agent
         performance across different capability dimensions.

2   Related Work
Large language models as autonomous agents. Recent progress in large language models has
enabled autonomous agents that interleave reasoning, action, observation, and tool use [7, 11, 31,
32, 42, 47]. ReAct [48] established a representative reasoning–acting loop, while Toolformer [36]
showed that language models can learn to invoke external tools. Subsequent systems extended this
paradigm toward richer orchestration and longer-horizon problem solving: HuggingGPT [37] uses
an LLM as a controller over specialized models, ToolLLM [33] studies large-scale API selection
and invocation, and Reflexion [38] improves agents through verbal feedback and memory. Beyond
text-only interaction, GUI and computer-use agents such as CogAgent [15] and AppAgent [51]
extend the paradigm to screens and mobile interfaces. These works establish the basic agent loop and
tool-use patterns, but they mainly target generic autonomy rather than persistent personal assistance.
Proactive agent systems. Proactive agents, distinct from reactive agents, initiate actions and pur-
sue goals autonomously, a concept formalized by [43]. This foundational work underpins modern
long-running assistants that leverage persistent memory, reusable skills, and local tool access. Open-
Claw [39] offers a robust hub-and-spoke architecture for multi-platform integration. Nanobot [35] em-
phasizes an ultra-lightweight, extensible core for research and easy modification. Hermes Agent [27]
features a built-in learning loop for autonomous skill creation and continuous self-improvement,
building a deeper user model across sessions. These systems collectively highlight a shared design
space for individualized assistance through advanced memory, skills, and tool management.
Benchmark for AI Agents. Earlier benchmarks evaluate LLM agents across web, OS, mobile,
and enterprise environments [8, 10, 17, 20, 22, 26, 34, 45, 46, 49, 53], but they target isolated task
execution rather than proactive personal assistance. More recent benchmarks instead targets proactive
agent systems and falls into three groups. The first group measures end-to-end task completion in
real environments. For instance, ClawBench [52] evaluates write-heavy actions on live production
websites to expose the gap between sandbox and real-world performance, while related efforts tackle
harder OpenClaw tasks and desktop applications [21, 1, 16]. The second group studies skill use and
adaptation. This is exemplified by SkillsBench [19], which contrasts curated and self-generated skills
to quantify their marginal effects, as well as subsequent research on continual skill learning [44, 23].
The third group emphasizes trustworthiness and dynamic environments: ClawMark [25] models multi-
day coworker scenarios with evolving backends, while other works formalize adversarial attacks and
trajectory-aware evaluation [41, 50]. Despite this progress toward live execution, evaluating agents in
real-world environments introduces critical instability, yet these recent benchmarks still rely on static
ground-truth answers or single-turn evaluation. Furthermore, they organize tasks by scenario and lack
analysis on agent frameworks. In contrast, UniClawBench tackles dynamic environments via hidden
checkpoint rubrics and a closed-loop multi-turn evaluation strategy. Moreover, its capability-oriented
taxonomy and cross-framework evaluation (OpenClaw, Nanobot, EDICT) explicitly disentangle
intrinsic model competence from framework-level design choices.


                                                   3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Result: complete_but_failed

                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Scoring (attempt 1) = 0.84    Recoverable: True

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Status: CONTINUE




    1 Task Package                                                     2 Executor Agent (in Docker)                                                                                              3A         Supervisor Agent
    Example Task (Multimodal)                                                                                                                                      Inputs                                    Hidden Evaluation Rubric                             Coarse
                                                            Agent Framework (e.g., OpenClaw/Nanobot/EDICT)                                                                                                                                                     progress signal
    Task Instruction: Cook Beef Wellington
                                                                                                                                                      •       Executor trajectory &
                                                                                                                                                                                            ID                Checkpoint (weight)                Status
     1. Find official YouTube tutorial             Example Trajectory (visible)                                                                                                             C1      Official video source (0.10)
                                                                                                                                                              artifact                                                                         ✅ pass         Score: 0.65
     2. Watch video
                                                   Step 1       Search YouTube “Gordin Ramsay Beef Wellington”                                                                              C2      ≥3 valid cooking screenshots (0.20)         ✅ pass        Status:
     3. Capture ≥3 key-step screenshots
     4. Read my_fridge.jpg                         Step 2        Play video and watch cooking process                                                                                       C3      Describe ≥3 steps & links files (0.15)      ✅ pass         complete but failed
                                                                                                                                                          •    Hidden References &
     5. Generate:                                  Step 3        Capture screenshot: searing beef                                                                                           C4      Fridge photo grounding (0.15)              ❌ fail         Recoverable: True
                                                                                                                                                               ground truth
        • shopping_list.md                                                                                                                                                                  C5      Missing-ingredient accuracy (0.30)
                                                   Step 4        Capture screenshot: wrapping pastry                                                                                                                                           ❌ fail         Verdict: Continue
        • cooking_steps.md                                                                                                                                •    Evaluation rule
                                                   Step 5        Capture screenshot: egg wash                                                                                               C6      Both MD files exist & complete (0.10) ❌ fail
                                                   Step 6        Read my_fridge.jpg
    Provided Resources                                                                                                                                                      INFORMATION FIREWALL (No Leakage)
                                                   Step 7        Compare ingredients with fridge photo
        Live web access (e.g., YouTube)
                                                   Step 8        Write and save shopping_list.md
        Empty workspace
                                                   Step 9        Write and save cooking_steps.md
        Initial files (e.g., my_fridge.jpg)                                                                                                                                                       3B User Simulator
        Installed tools & services                 Produced Artifacts (visible)                                                                                  Inputs                 User Simulator (LLM-based):
        (Browser, GUI Apps, Skills etc.)
                                                                                                                                                      •        Executor trajectory &     - Simulate a real user who checks the results and provides natural feedback
                                                                                                                                                               artifact
    Example Fridge Photo
                                                                                                                                                              (same as supervisor)                Verify the screenshots against the video, align filenames and steps,
                                                                                                                         Shipping   Cooking_
                                                    Screenshot_step1.png   Screenshot_step2.png   Screenshot_step3.png   _list.md   steps.md
                                                                                                                                                                                                  and ensure the shopping list includes all items not visible in the fridge.
                                                                                                                                                      •       Coarse progress signal


                                                                                                                                    Natural Language Feedback
                                                                                                                                       from User Simulator

     Hidden Resources
         References and ground truth                4    Termination Conditions (per task)                                                                                       5 Final Metrics (by supervisor)
         Evaluation rule
                                                     ✅ Pass: Final score ≥ threshold (e.g., 0.9).                                                                                          Supervisor makes the final judgement using evaluation rule
                                                     ⏳ Continue: task not passed but recoverable AND follow-ups remain (e.g., max 3 total).
            Data Flow                Status Flow                                                                                                                                       Metric 1: PR (Pass Rate)                Metric 2: AS (Average Score)
                                                     ❌ Fail: task not passed and unrecoverable OR task not passed and no follow-ups remain.
            Natural Language Feedback
                                                         Timeout: executor fails to complete within the time limit (e.g., 30 minutes).
                                                                                                                                                                                        Task-level: pass / fail                    Step-level: aggregated score
            Information Firewall




Figure 2: Three-role Closed-loop Evaluation Strategy. A task is executed by an agent (Executor)
within a real-world environment using only public inputs (e.g., tools, files, and web access). The
resulting observable trajectory and produced artifacts are assessed by a hidden Supervisor, which ap-
plies fine-grained checkpoint-based rubrics and private references to compute a structured evaluation
          Legend
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Metric 1


state (e.g., pass / fail / continue) and score. To prevent leakage of evaluation criteria, only a coarse
progress signal is exposed through an information firewall to a User Simulator, which generates
natural-language feedback based solely on visible evidence. The sanitized feedback is returned to
the executor for iterative refinement, forming a multi-turn closed loop. The example illustrates a
multimodal task (Beef Wellington cooking with fridge grounding), where the agent must produce
screenshots and grounded outputs, emphasizing strict evidence-based evaluation.


3         UniClawbench
This section presents the architectural framework of UniClawBench. We first establish a capability-
oriented task taxonomy and detail the benchmark composition, including task categorization, the
hierarchical task-package structure, and comprehensive data statistics (§3.1). Subsequently, we
articulate the three-role closed-loop evaluation strategy, which decouples the evaluated executor,
hidden supervisor agent, and public user simulator agent to support multi-turn feedback without
leaking private grading information (§3.2). Finally, we elaborate on the execution and evaluation
system, including the docker-based runtime, task-resource injection, artifact collection, and supervisor-
driven scoring pipeline (§3.3).

3.1           Capability-Oriented Task Taxonomy and Benchmark Composition

Existing benchmarks typically organize tasks by application domain (e.g., shopping or travel) or by
interaction surface (e.g., web and desktop environments). These taxonomies are useful for comparing
performance across settings, but they provide limited diagnostic evidence about which capability
causes an agent to fail. A failure in a domain-level task may reflect many different bottlenecks, such
as incorrect tool use, insufficient exploration, weak visual grounding, poor long-context reasoning,
or failure to coordinate across applications. In realistic personal workflows, a capable proactive
agent must invoke specialized tools, investigate unfamiliar or underspecified environments, maintain
consistency over long evidence chains, ground its actions in non-textual signals, and coordinate
state across multiple applications. These requirements motivate UniClawBench’s capability-oriented
taxonomy, which categorizes tasks into five core dimensions: Skill Usage, Exploration, Long-Context
Reasoning, Multimodal Understanding, and Cross-Platform Coordination. Each task is assigned to
the category that best captures its primary capability bottleneck, i.e., the capability whose absence
would prevent successful completion.
Skill-usage tasks. Skill-usage tasks evaluate an agent’s proficiency in selecting, inspecting, and
operating task-specific tools or APIs. The task package incorporates explicit skills, local services,
fixture data, or required command-line workflows. The key bottleneck is therefore not discovering
where information may exist, but correctly choosing, understanding, and executing the provided tool
interface to produce a verifiable artifact. Representative tasks include OCR of boarding-pass scans,


                                                                                                                                               4
spreadsheet and CSV reconciliation, access-log analysis, audio transcription, Mermaid or diagram
generation, SQLite querying, Git or Docker audits, document conversion, and API-backed workflows.
These tasks are designed so that prior knowledge or a plausible final answer is insufficient: the agent
must actually consult the declared skill or tool interface, apply it to the provided data, and save
structured outputs such as JSON, CSV, reports, logs, or converted files.
Exploration tasks. Exploration tasks characterize an agent’s capacity for open-ended investigation
in the presence of incomplete, noisy, or potentially misleading information. Agents are required
to reverse-engineer undocumented web APIs and their real fields to pull data instead of scraping
HTML, audit shell or infrastructure configurations and reconcile silent conflicts, select a single best
option from a fixed candidate set under quantitative constraints, trace images or data points back to
their authoritative source, validate tool behavior inside local fixtures, or solve single-position puzzles
and board games. Unlike skill-usage tasks, where the relevant tool interface is usually explicit,
exploration tasks require the agent to determine which sources, files, services, logs, or hypotheses
are relevant before it can complete the task. These tasks emphasize the process of exploration itself:
agents must examine candidate sources, reject incorrect alternatives, document negative evidence, and
leave a trace that distinguishes real investigation from a guessed conclusion. The expected outputs
usually include both a final artifact and supporting audit records, such as logs, JSON notes, command
transcripts, screenshots, hashes, or source comparisons.
Long-context Reasoning tasks. Long-context tasks evaluate whether agents can aggregate and
maintain evidence across heterogeneous sources, long documents, or extended interaction traces.
The defining difficulty is not the length of any single document, but the need to preserve constraints,
reconcile conflicting evidence, and produce a globally consistent synthesis across many pieces of
context. These tasks necessitate synthesizing information from multiple web pages, videos, PDFs,
reviews, emails, logs, or research materials before producing a coherent final answer. Examples
include comparing headphone recommendations across Bilibili and YouTube and then checking prod-
uct prices and specifications, planning subscriptions or travel under many constraints, synthesizing
reading packs into reports or slides, monitoring event streams, auditing long email or fraud records,
and solving tasks that require sustained state tracking such as games or multi-step investigations. The
main difficulty is not retrieving isolated facts but maintaining global consistency across scattered
evidence, resolving conflicts, and producing an auditable synthesis.
Multimodal Understanding tasks. Multimodal tasks require agents to extract, interpret, and generate
information grounded in images, videos, and audio. A task is assigned to this category only when the
correctness of the final output depends on evidence that must be obtained from non-textual content,
rather than from metadata, filenames, or plausible textual inference alone. The tasks are constructed
around realistic content rather than synthetic visual questions. For example, agents may need to
locate a specific figure in an academic paper and recreate it, reconstruct visual diagrams or SVG-like
objects, inspect food or product photos, extract evidence from YouTube videos, generate subtitles or
lyrics, or organize local image collections. These tasks typically require agents to combine visual
perception with tool use and content generation: a successful run must not only identify the right
visual content, but also save verifiable outputs such as reproduced plots, screenshots, scripts, captions,
or structured summaries.
Cross-platform Coordination tasks. Cross-platform tasks require agents to synchronize and
orchestrate information across heterogeneous applications and interfaces. We treat cross-platform
coordination as a capability rather than an environment label: the agent must preserve state, transfer
information, and verify side effects across application boundaries. Unlike tasks that can be completed
entirely in a browser or terminal, these tasks may involve moving information among web pages,
desktop GUI applications, local files, calendars, spreadsheets, note-taking tools, citation managers,
PDF readers, and communication platforms. For example, an agent may need to read a PDF, create
a Zotero record, export a BibTeX citation, write an Obsidian literature note, and save screenshots
proving that the real desktop applications were used. Other tasks involve travel planning across
official websites and map services, receipt reconciliation through GUI tools, calendar/event creation,
or multi- application research workflows. Success depends on preserving state and evidence across
platforms, not merely producing a textual answer.
Overall, UniClawBench contains 400 bilingual real world tasks, with 40 English and 40 Chinese tasks
for each capability. All tasks are meticulously manually constructed based on genuine, day-to-day
scenarios encountered by everyday users. We intentionally constrain and design each scenario so that
its completion primarily bottlenecks on a single model capability, while allowing auxiliary operations
to appear naturally when needed. Each task is designed as a complete task package, rather than a
standalone prompt-answer pair. A task package includes the user instruction, task-specific context,


                                                    5
                                                                                                    (a) Application Domains
                                                                              Long                            Skill                                                            Cross-
                                        Multimodal                           Context                          Usage                         Exploration                       Platform
                                                                                                                                                                                                    100
         Software/DevOps                    0%                                 15%                             30%                            17.5%                             12.5%

      Media/Entertainment                  45%                                 2.5%                             5%                             10%                              7.5%

        AI/ML & Research                    5%                                 20%                              5%                             15%                              25%

             Travel/Events                 12.5%                              17.5%                             5%                              0%                              22.5%

          Business/Finance                 2.5%                               12.5%                            22.5%                          12.5%                             7.5%                80
          Productivity/KM                   5%                                 2.5%                            25%                              0%                              10%

       Consumer/Shopping                    5%                                 7.5%                             0%                              5%                              7.5%

            Games/Puzzles                   0%                                 15%                              0%                            17.5%                              0%

            Data/Analytics                 2.5%                                2.5%                            7.5%                             5%                               5%

                                           22.5%                                0%                              0%                              5%                              2.5%
                                                                                                                                                                                                    60
           Design/Creative

              Public/Civic                  0%                                  5%                              0%                            12.5%                              0%



                                                           (b) Input Types                                                                            (c) Output Types                                    Share (%)
                                                  Long          Skill                       Cross-                                           Long          Skill                          Cross-
                              Multimodal         Context        Usage        Exploration   Platform                            Multimodal   Context        Usage     Exploration         Platform
                                                                                                                                                                                                    40
             Tables / JSON      17.5%               5%          47.5%           40%         2.5%                       JSON       0%          15%           32.5%        100%              50%

              Logs / email       0%                30%          27.5%            0%         7.5%        Screenshots / images     42.5%       52.5%          10%          2.5%              55%

               Code / repo       0%                 0%          12.5%           10%          0%                 CSV / sheet      22.5%         0%           62.5%        0%               22.5%

      Live web / web pages       30%               40%           0%            52.5%        72.5%              Web / HTML         7.5%        20%            0%          0%                0%

       Images / screenshots     37.5%               0%           10%           17.5%         10%             Calendar / ICS       0%           0%           2.5%         0%               12.5%     20

          PDF / documents        10%               22.5%         20%             0%         12.5%             PDF / citation      0%           0%            0%          0%               7.5%

                     Video      42.5%              12.5%         5%              0%          5%             PDF / office doc      0%          2.5%          7.5%         0%                15%

                    Audio       12.5%               0%           5%              0%         2.5%         Report / Markdown        95%         95%           77.5%        10%              87.5%

           Database / store      0%                 0%           5%              0%          0%              GUI / app state      0%           0%            0%          0%                30%
                                                                                                                                                                                                    0




Figure 3: Diversity and composition statistics of UniClawBench. The heatmaps detail (a) the broad
application-domain coverage designed to prevent scenario bias, as well as the diverse (b) input and
(c) output formats. These distributions reflect the multimodal and heterogeneous nature of real-world
agent tasks. Each value denotes the within-category percentage.

input files or web resources, tools and services, skills, expected outputs, and hidden evaluation
references. A representative task example is illustrated in Figure 2.
To ensure a comprehensive and realistic evaluation, UniClawBench encompasses a highly diverse set
of task formats and scenarios. As detailed in the Figure 3, our benchmark spans a broad spectrum of
application domains, ensuring that the evaluation of each foundational capability is not biased toward
any specific domain. Furthermore, to faithfully reflect the heterogeneous nature of real-world tasks,
the tasks incorporate a rich variety of input and output modalities. Rather than relying exclusively on
standard text or JSON, agents are required to process complex inputs, such as live web pages, code
repositories, videos, and databases, and successfully produce diverse, actionable outputs, including
calendar files, office documents, diagrams, and GUI application states.

3.2   Three-role Closed-loop Evaluation Strategy
Unlike single-turn assistants, proactive agents are typically used through multi-turn user-agent
interaction. A user may inspect an intermediate result, point out missing requirements, ask for
refinement, or provide additional constraints. Therefore, evaluating only the first response does not
fully capture whether an agent can recover from partial progress and continue a task under user
feedback. UniClawBench introduces a closed-loop evaluation design that models this interaction
while preserving controlled and reproducible grading. The central challenge is to provide useful
follow-up feedback without exposing the hidden evaluation criteria.
Our design involves three roles. The executor is the agent being evaluated. It receives only the public
task instruction and the permitted task package, including available files, tools, services, and runtime
resources. The supervisor is a hidden evaluator agent. It observes the full execution trajectory
and the produced artifacts, autonomously analyzes them against task-specific hidden references and
evaluation rubrics, and gives out judgments. The user simulator is also an agent. It analyzes the
visible execution trajectory and outputs to generate natural feedback that the executor can act on in
each round. Unlike the supervisor, the user simulator is designed to emulate the behavior of a typical
end user: it focuses on visible progress, result quality, and apparent issues, rather than relying on
predefined references or detailed technical inspection.
This design introduces a risk of information leakage: if the user simulator observes hidden rubrics
or ground-truth answers, its feedback may reveal privileged hints to the executor. UniClawBench
therefore isolates the supervisor from the user simulator. Although the supervisor has access to
the exact grading criteria, it only forwards a limited high-level status signal, such as whether the
attempt has passed, failed, or remains recoverable. Relying only on this status signal and the agent’s
visible trajectory, the user simulator generates natural feedback without access to hidden references
or supervisor rationales. A feedback rewriter further sanitizes this feedback before it is delivered


                                                                                                                       6
to the executor. This workflow mimics realistic human-agent interaction while keeping the hidden
evaluation criteria separated from the agent-facing dialogue. An illustration is shown in Figure 2.


3.3   Evaluation System

UniClawBench implements the closed-loop evaluation through a host-supervised, container-executed
runtime. For each task, the executor is launched in a fresh Docker environment containing the public
instruction, input sources, tools, skills and relevant services. Hidden references and grading rubrics
are never exposed to the executor. The executor runs inside the container using one of the supported
agent systems, such as OpenClaw, Nanobot, or EDICT. It can interact with the browser, command
line, GUI applications, local files, and injected services, and is instructed to save useful evidence
and final outputs to a designated result directory. After each executor turn, the runner collects the
observable trajectory, including transcripts, tool-use records, runtime states, and saved artifacts.
These materials are then provided to the hidden supervisor together with the task-specific evaluation
references. The supervisor works in a separate workspace and it scores the executor’s performance
using checkpoint-based rubrics and returns a structured evaluation state: pass, fail, or continue. A
pass indicates that the task has been successfully completed, while a fail denotes a fundamental,
irrecoverable error where the objective can no longer be achieved. A continue signifies that the
agent’s current progress is flawed or incomplete, but the task remains recoverable in subsequent
turns. Alongside this status, the supervisor outputs a detailed justification, mapping the collected
evidence to the rubrics to substantiate its decision. If the attempt is incomplete but recoverable, the
public user simulator receives only the visible trajectory and the high-level status signal. It generates
natural follow-up feedback, which is sanitized before being sent back to the executor as the next user
message. The loop continues until the task passes, fails irrecoverably, reaches the follow-up budget,
or encounters a timeout limit. This system preserves realistic multi-turn interaction while keeping
grading information isolated from the evaluated agent.



4     Experiments

4.1   Environmental Setup

We conduct two groups of experiments. First, we compare ten executor models under the same
OpenClaw framework (v2026.3.11), which isolates model-level capability differences. Second,
we select three representative models and evaluate them under OpenClaw (v2026.3.11), Nanobot
(v0.1.5.post3), and EDICT, allowing us to study how agent-framework design affects certain per-
formance. All compared runs use the same tasks, hidden evaluation rubrics and scoring pipeline.
For both supervision and user simulation, we use separate Codex agents based on GPT-5.4 with
high reasoning effort. To reduce context overhead, screenshots from the executor trajectory are not
directly inserted into the initial context of the supervisor or user simulator. Instead, they are stored as
observable files and can be inspected on demand when visual evidence is needed. To ensure a fair
comparison and enable the system image to handle browser and GUI tasks, we abandon the OpenClaw
browser extension, installing and preparing each frameworks with the same basic skills, including
self-written Advanced Packaging Tool (apt) skill, DuckDuckGo Search skill [9], Web Search skill [5],
Agent-Browser skill [18], and Desktop Control [24] skill. All experiments are executed on Intel Core
i7-13700 host machines with 16GB of RAM, with every isolated Docker containers allocated 2GB of
memory. On average, each task run takes approximately 17.4 minutes.
In all experiments, each task allows up to two follow-up user interactions after the initial instruction.
To support the agentic and interactive nature of our tasks while avoiding unbounded execution, we
impose two time limits. The first is a global timeout, which bounds the total wall-clock time across
all turns of a task. The second is a per-turn timeout, which limits the duration of any single executor
turn. For standard tasks, we set the global timeout to 30 minutes and the per-turn timeout to 20
minutes. For long context tasks, which require processing substantially larger inputs and performing
more extensive reasoning, we increase these limits to 45 minutes and 30 minutes, respectively. We
report two metrics: Pass Rate (PR), the percentage of tasks that reach a final pass state, and Average
Score (AS), the mean checkpoint-based score assigned by the supervisor. When a run exceeds either
the global or per-turn timeout, we credit the task with the highest checkpoint-based score achieved
among its completed turns, rather than discarding the partial progress made up to that point.

                                                    7
4.2   Benchmark Evaluation Reliability Study
To validate the reliability of our automatic evaluation pipeline, we randomly sample 50 completed
trajectories and ask three human experts to independently evaluate each of them. Each expert provides
both a binary pass/fail judgment and a continuous completion score corresponding to PR and AS,
respectively. For human PR, we take the majority vote among the three experts and for human AS,
we average their completion scores. We then compare these aggregated human judgments with the
supervisor-produced PR and AS. The automatic pass/fail decision achieves 92.0% agreement with
the human majority vote, while the checkpoint-based AS obtains a strong correlation with averaged
human completion scores, with Pearson r = 0.71 and Spearman ρ = 0.68.
Table 1: Average quantitative evaluation across English and Chinese subsets of UniClawBench. To
isolate inherent model capabilities from framework-level design choices, all 10 models are evaluated
as the executor under the same OpenClaw framework. Performance is measured by Pass Rate (PR)
and checkpoint-based Average Score (AS) across the five foundational capability categories.
                               Skill Usage    Exploration     Long Context    Multimodal      Cross Platform     Overall
 Model
                               PR      AS      PR      AS      PR      AS      PR      AS      PR      AS       PR      AS
 Kimi-2.6 [2]                 0.438   0.834   0.775   0.884   0.287   0.655   0.075   0.494   0.237   0.679    0.362   0.709
 Qwen-3.5-Plus [40]           0.300   0.771   0.787   0.915   0.200   0.648   0.075   0.583   0.225   0.737    0.318   0.731
 GPT-4.1 [28]                 0.075   0.492   0.512   0.769   0.075   0.338   0.075   0.418   0.025   0.425    0.152   0.488
 GPT-5.4-Mini [30]            0.188   0.681   0.688   0.834   0.100   0.498   0.062   0.454   0.037   0.615    0.215   0.616
 Gemini-3.0-Flash [12]        0.287   0.750   0.800   0.899   0.163   0.621   0.087   0.544   0.075   0.678    0.282   0.698
 Gemini-3.1-Flash-Lite [13]   0.050   0.569   0.600   0.835   0.062   0.374   0.037   0.409   0.025   0.530    0.155   0.543
 Claude Sonnet-4.6 [4]        0.512   0.873   0.812   0.913   0.400   0.649   0.212   0.626   0.338   0.753    0.455   0.763
 Gemini-3.1-Pro [14]          0.300   0.769   0.850   0.947   0.188   0.646   0.163   0.583   0.125   0.690    0.325   0.727
 GPT-5.4 [29]                 0.512   0.845   0.775   0.897   0.225   0.705   0.175   0.617   0.350   0.804    0.407   0.774
 Claude Opus-4.8 [3]          0.550   0.829   0.825   0.928   0.438   0.576   0.175   0.493   0.388   0.686    0.475   0.702


4.3   Cross-Model Benchmark Results
We benchmark 10 SOTA models with Openclaw framework on the English and Chinese subset of
UniClawbench. The results are presented in Table 1. The results show that while leading closed-
source models like Claude Opus-4.8 and GPT-5.4 achieve the highest overall pass rates, the absolute
success rates remain strictly below 50%. This highlights the extreme difficulty of the benchmark,
revealing a profound gap between sandboxed capabilities and real-world task execution. Notably,
open-source models are rapidly closing this performance gap. Models like Qwen-3.5-Plus and Kimi-
2.6 show highly competitive results that even surpasses closed-source models like Gemini-3.1-pro. A
widespread execution issue across all evaluated models is the severe “halfway failure” phenomenon,
evidenced by the significant gap between their intermediate average scores and final pass rates. Most
models consistently secure high checkpoint-based scores but ultimately fail to complete the entire task.
This indicates that while current agents can successfully make partial progress, they frequently make
irrecoverable errors during extended execution chains, lacking the reliability required for complex
real-world tasks. From the capability perspective, models perform relatively better on Skill Usage
and Exploration tasks, where the main challenge is to identify the right tool or evidence source and
apply it correctly. In contrast, Long Context, Multimodal, and Cross Platform tasks remain much
harder, because they require agents to keep memories through long trajectories, ground decisions
in non-textual evidence, and coordinate actions across multiple applications. This suggests that
current agents are already reasonably capable of local tool operation and information seeking, but
still struggle with long-horizon memory, multimodal grounding, and cross-application coordination.
4.4   Cross-Framework Benchmark Results
Table 2 details the performance of representative models across the OpenClaw, Nanobot, and EDICT
frameworks. The results reveal that framework architecture which determines how execution trajecto-
ries are organized, profoundly influences task success. The performance gap between frameworks
widens as base model capabilities increase, highlighting how structural design either amplifies or
bottlenecks intrinsic model reasoning.
OpenClaw consistently achieves the highest pass rate across all tested models. As a centralized,
single-agent framework, its primary advantage lies in minimal information loss. The original task
constraints, intermediate tool execution evidence, and closed-loop user feedback are seamlessly
preserved within a unified trajectory. This cohesive context management allows strong models to
reliably translate partial progress into complete, strictly verifiable task successes.
EDICT exhibits a distinct pattern: relatively high average scores coupled with notably lower pass
rates. This discrepancy exposes the “coordination friction” inherent in its multi-agent orchestration.


                                                              8
Table 2: Average cross-framework performance across the English and Chinese subsets of UniClaw-
Bench. We evaluate three representative models across OpenClaw, EDICT, and Nanobot frameworks.
Results are presented as Pass Rate (PR), Average Score (AS), and average executor-side input/output
token (TokenI & TokenO ) usage per task. Input tokens are reported in millions and output tokens in
thousands.
                                                                                                                              Skill Usage                                                 Exploration                              Long Context                    Multimodal                                     Cross Platform                                               Overall
  Model                                                                      Framework
                                                                                                                              PR                                    AS                          PR                AS                 PR            AS                  PR            AS                            PR                         AS            PR          AS           TokenI          TokenO
                                                                             OpenClaw [39]                                 0.512                      0.845                       0.775                         0.897              0.225          0.705          0.175           0.617                            0.350                      0.804         0.407      0.774           1.15            11.0
  GPT-5.4 [29]                                                               EDICT [6]                                     0.375                      0.791                       0.725                         0.883              0.212          0.693          0.125           0.559                            0.250                      0.792         0.338      0.744           1.68            18.3
                                                                             Nanobot [35]                                  0.338                      0.684                       0.675                         0.819              0.150          0.569          0.050           0.499                            0.237                      0.630         0.290      0.640           0.57             9.5
                                                                             OpenClaw [39]                                 0.550                      0.829                       0.825                         0.928              0.438          0.576          0.175           0.493                            0.388                      0.686         0.475      0.702           0.78            16.4
  Claude Opus-4.8 [3]                                                        EDICT [6]                                     0.475                      0.751                       0.713                         0.838              0.362          0.583          0.175           0.576                            0.350                      0.687         0.415      0.687           2.15            42.7
                                                                             Nanobot [35]                                  0.525                      0.766                       0.787                         0.867              0.338          0.548          0.037           0.264                            0.237                      0.488         0.385      0.587           0.49            16.2
                                                                             OpenClaw [39]                                 0.438                      0.834                       0.775                         0.884              0.287          0.655          0.075           0.494                            0.237                      0.679         0.362      0.709           1.09            22.9
  Kimi-2.6 [2]                                                               EDICT [6]                                     0.388                      0.813                       0.725                         0.868              0.250          0.601          0.075           0.506                            0.163                      0.686         0.320      0.695           2.53            51.5
                                                                             Nanobot [35]                                  0.263                      0.684                       0.725                         0.847              0.200          0.501          0.050           0.317                            0.150                      0.519         0.278      0.573           0.86            21.3


                                                           (a) Token Usage by Model                                                                                                                                (b) Token Usage by Task Dimension                                                                                               (c) Performance Progression by Cycle
                           3.5                                                                                                         30                                                       3.0                                                                                  25                                                 35                                                              0.72
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            31.7%
                           3.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         29.5%
                                                                                                                                       25                                                       2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2.3M 18.8K                                 20                                                 30                                                              0.68




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Avg Cumulative-Max Score
    Avg Input Tokens (M)                                                                                                                    Avg Output Tokens (K)        Avg Input Tokens (M)                                                                                             Avg Output Tokens (K)
                           2.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.679
                                                                                                                                       20                                                       2.0            15.6K




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Pass Rate (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               14.8K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1.7M 14.0K   15                                                 25         23.8%                                                0.64
                           2.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.652
                                                                                                                                       15                                                       1.5
                           1.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1.2M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     10                                                 20                                                              0.60
                                                                                                                                       10                                                       1.0                               6.7K
                           1.0                                                                                                                                                                          0.7M

                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.5M                                                        5                                                  15                                                              0.56
                                                                                                                                       5                                                        0.5
                           0.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.565


                           0.0                                                                                                         0                                                        0.0                                                                                  0                                                  10                                                              0.52
                                                                                                                      i                                                                                                                      xt              l                                                                                       1                   2                    3
                               t4
                                  .6
                                         3.5
                                             +        sh       5.4     i2
                                                                          .6       Pr
                                                                                     o        .8       4.1        Min            ite                                                                    sag
                                                                                                                                                                                                           e               tion          onte g           oda g            orm
                             ne                   Fla       T-                             s4       T-                     sh
                                                                                                                              -L                                                                      lU               lora                          ltim              latf on
                           on         en       i3        GP        Kim       i3
                                                                                .1      pu       GP          5.4                                                                                 Skil              Exp                g-C nin      Mu tandin       ss-P inati                                                                                    Supervision Cycle
                                   Qw      min                           min          eO                  T-           Fla                                                                                                         Lon easo                     Cro oord
      eS                                                                           ud                 GP          3.1                                                                                                                 R            ders
    ud                                  Ge                           Ge       Cla                             ini                                                                                                                                 Un               C
 Cla                                                                                                       m
                                                                                                        Ge


                                                                                                                                 Avg Input (M)                                       Avg Output (K)                                                                                                                                             Pass Rate (%)           Avg Cum-Max Score




Figure 4: Token Usage and Performance Progression by Cycle. (a) and (b) display the token
usage on the OpenClaw system, categorised by model and task dimension, (c) demonstrates the
performance progression by cycle motivated by the user follow-ups.


The central orchestrator dispatches tasks based on discrete state polling (e.g., Kanban boards) but
lacks real-time supervision over downstream sub-agents. If a sub-agent fails to transmit precise state
updates or drops context during handoffs, the execution pipeline stalls, yielding partial progress that
fails. Furthermore, during long-context tasks, identity and role constraints are easily forgotten. As a
result, the orchestrator does the work itself instead of assigning it. The system pays the high token
cost of multiple agents but gets none of the collaborative benefits.
Designed with an ultra-lightweight structure, Nanobot demonstrates a highly optimized token usage
in practice, utilizing significantly fewer tokens than OpenClaw (e.g., 0.57M vs. 1.15M average input
tokens for GPT-5.4). However, this extreme efficiency introduces an inherent trade-off with perfor-
mance. In rigorous, real-world tasks requiring extended evidence chains and complete trajectories,
this simplified context management often struggles to produce fine-grained reasoning steps and long
textual evidence. Consequently, while the framework effectively achieve partial progress and secures
high intermediate checkpoint scores, it frequently fails to generate the complete results demanded by
strict evaluations, resulting in a notably lower overall pass rates.

4.5                                  Token Usage and Performance Progression
As illustrated in Figure 4 (a) (b), under the OpenClaw framework, token usage varies significantly
across different models and inherently increases for capability dimensions where current models
exhibit relative weaknesses, like long-context and multimodal understanding. Table 2 also provides
statistics on token usage across different frameworks, where EDICT consume a huge amount of token
in total and Nanobot keeps its extreme token efficiency. Furthermore, Figure 4 (c) demonstrates that
agent performance consistently improves across interaction cycles, validating that multi-turn user
feedback is essential for dynamic error recovery. This also mimics user-agent interaction in real life.

5                                Conclusion and Limitations
In this paper, we introduce UniClawBench, a capability-driven benchmark designed to evaluate proac-
tive agents in dynamic, real-world environments. Moving beyond static sandboxes, we decompose
agent evaluation into five foundational capability categories across 400 bilingual real-world tasks. To


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           9
faithfully capture multi-turn human-agent collaboration without leaking grading criteria, we propose
a novel three-role closed-loop framework comprising an executor agent, a hidden supervisor agent,
and a user simulator agent. Our evaluations reveal that current agents struggle with long-horizon
memory and cross-platform coordination, and that framework architectures often bottleneck intrinsic
model capabilities. While UniClawBench introduces a rigorous evaluation framework, it is limited
by the relatively small set of 400 manually curated tasks, possible instability from live-environment
execution, and the potential bias that may be introduced by LLM-based evaluation. Despite these
constraints, UniClawBench successfully pinpoints the root causes of agent failures, paving the way
for more reliable proactive assistants.

References
 [1] Kilo AI. Pinchbench: Real-world benchmarks for ai coding agents. https://github.com/
     pinchbench/skill, 2026.
 [2] Kimi AI. Kimi k2.6: From code to creation, from one to many. https://www.kimi.com/
     ai-models/kimi-k2-6, 2026.
 [3] Anthropic.  Introducing claude opus 4.6.              https://www.anthropic.com/news/
     claude-opus-4-6, 2026.
 [4] Anthropic.  Introducing claude sonnet 4.6.            https://www.anthropic.com/news/
     claude-sonnet-4-6, 2026.
 [5] Billyutw. Openclaw web-search skill. https://clawhub.ai/billyutw/web-search, 2026.
 [6] cft0808. Openclaw edict. https://github.com/cft0808/edict, 2026.
 [7] Wenhu Chen, Xueguang Ma, Xinyi Wang, and William W Cohen. Program of thoughts
     prompting: Disentangling computation from reasoning for numerical reasoning tasks. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2211.12588, 2022.
 [8] De Chezelles, Thibault Le Sellier, Sahar Omidi Shayegan, Lawrence Keunho Jang, Xing Han
     Lù, Ori Yoran, Dehan Kong, Frank F Xu, Siva Reddy, Quentin Cappart, et al. The browsergym
     ecosystem for web agent research. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.05467, 2024.
 [9] Cscsxx606.   Duckduckgo search openclaw.                 https://github.com/cscsxx606/
     duckduckgo-search-openclaw, 2026.
[10] Alexandre Drouin, Maxime Gasse, Massimo Caccia, Issam H Laradji, Manuel Del Verme,
     Tom Marty, Léo Boisvert, Megh Thakkar, Quentin Cappart, David Vazquez, et al. Workarena:
     How capable are web agents at solving common knowledge work tasks? arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2403.07718, 2024.
[11] Chengqi Duan, Kaiyue Sun, Rongyao Fang, Manyuan Zhang, Yan Feng, Ying Luo, Yufang
     Liu, Ke Wang, Peng Pei, Xunliang Cai, et al. Codeplot-cot: Mathematical visual reasoning by
     thinking with code-driven images. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
     Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 9586–9596, 2026.
[12] Google. Gemini 3 flash. https://deepmind.google/models/gemini/flash/, 2025.
[13] Google. Gemini 3.1 flash lite. https://deepmind.google/models/gemini/flash-lite/,
     2026.
[14] Google. Gemini 3.1 pro. https://deepmind.google/models/gemini/pro/, 2026.
[15] Wenyi Hong, Weihan Wang, Qingsong Lv, Jiazheng Xu, Wenmeng Yu, Junhui Ji, Yan Wang,
     Zihan Wang, Yuxiao Dong, Ming Ding, et al. Cogagent: A visual language model for gui agents.
     In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages
     14281–14290, 2024.
[16] JetAstra. Macagentbench: Benchmark agents where they actually work — on macos.
     https://github.com/JetAstra/MacAgentBench, 2026.


                                                 10
[17] Jing Yu Koh, Robert Lo, Lawrence Jang, Vikram Duvvur, Ming Lim, Po-Yu Huang, Graham
     Neubig, Shuyan Zhou, Russ Salakhutdinov, and Daniel Fried. Visualwebarena: Evaluating
     multimodal agents on realistic visual web tasks. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of
     the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 881–905, 2024.
[18] Vercel Labs.    Agent browser openclaw.             https://github.com/vercel-labs/
     agent-browser, 2026.
[19] Xiangyi Li, Wenbo Chen, Yimin Liu, Shenghan Zheng, Xiaokun Chen, Yifeng He, Yubo Li,
     Bingran You, Haotian Shen, Jiankai Sun, et al. Skillsbench: Benchmarking how well agent
     skills work across diverse tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.12670, 2026.
[20] Xiao Liu, Hao Yu, Hanchen Zhang, Yifan Xu, Xuanyu Lei, Hanyu Lai, Yu Gu, Hangliang
     Ding, Kaiwen Men, Kejuan Yang, et al. Agentbench: Evaluating llms as agents. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2308.03688, 2023.
[21] Xiang Long, Li Du, Yilong Xu, Fangcheng Liu, Haoqing Wang, Ning Ding, Ziheng Li, Jianyuan
     Guo, and Yehui Tang. Liveclawbench: Benchmarking llm agents on complex, real-world
     assistant tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.13072, 2026.
[22] Chang Ma, Junlei Zhang, Zhihao Zhu, Cheng Yang, Yujiu Yang, Yaohui Jin, Zhenzhong Lan,
     Lingpeng Kong, and Junxian He. Agentboard: An analytical evaluation board of multi-turn llm
     agents. Advances in neural information processing systems, 37:74325–74362, 2024.
[23] Ziyu Ma, Shidong Yang, Yuxiang Ji, Xucong Wang, Yong Wang, Yiming Hu, Tongwen Huang,
     and Xiangxiang Chu. Skillclaw: Let skills evolve collectively with agentic evolver. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2604.08377, 2026.
[24] Matagul. Desktop control openclaw. https://clawhub.ai/matagul/desktop-control,
     2026.
[25] Fanqing Meng, Lingxiao Du, Zijian Wu, Guanzheng Chen, Xiangyan Liu, Jiaqi Liao, Chonghe
     Jiang, Zhenglin Wan, Jiawei Gu, Pengfei Zhou, et al. Clawmark: A living-world benchmark for
     multi-turn, multi-day, multimodal coworker agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.23781, 2026.
[26] Grégoire Mialon, Clémentine Fourrier, Thomas Wolf, Yann LeCun, and Thomas Scialom. Gaia:
     a benchmark for general ai assistants. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
     Representations, 2023.
[27] NousResearch. Hermes agent: An agent that grows with you. https://github.com/
     nousresearch/hermes-agent, 2026.
[28] OpenAI. Introducing gpt-4.1 in the api. https://openai.com/index/gpt-4-1/, 2025.
[29] OpenAI. Introducing gpt-5.4. https://openai.com/index/introducing-gpt-5-4/,
     2026.
[30] OpenAI. Introducing gpt-5.4 mini and nano. https://openai.com/zh-Hans-CN/index/
     introducing-gpt-5-4-mini-and-nano/, 2026.
[31] Bhargavi Paranjape, Scott Lundberg, Sameer Singh, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Luke Zettlemoyer,
     and Marco Tulio Ribeiro. Art: Automatic multi-step reasoning and tool-use for large language
     models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.09014, 2023.
[32] Aaron Parisi, Yao Zhao, and Noah Fiedel. Talm: Tool augmented language models. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2205.12255, 2022.
[33] Yujia Qin, Shihao Liang, Yining Ye, Kunlun Zhu, Lan Yan, Yaxi Lu, Yankai Lin, Xin Cong,
     Xiangru Tang, Bill Qian, et al. Toolllm: Facilitating large language models to master 16000+
     real-world apis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.16789, 2023.
[34] Christopher Rawles, Sarah Clinckemaillie, Yifan Chang, Jonathan Waltz, Gabrielle Lau, Mary-
     beth Fair, Alice Li, William Bishop, Wei Li, Folawiyo Campbell-Ajala, et al. Androidworld: A
     dynamic benchmarking environment for autonomous agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.14573,
     2024.


                                               11
[35] Xubin Ren et al. Nanobot: The ultra-lightweight personal ai agent. https://github.com/
     HKUDS/nanobot, 2026.
[36] Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessì, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Eric Hambro,
     Luke Zettlemoyer, Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. Toolformer: Language models
     can teach themselves to use tools. Advances in neural information processing systems, 36:
     68539–68551, 2023.
[37] Yongliang Shen, Kaitao Song, Xu Tan, Dongsheng Li, Weiming Lu, and Yueting Zhuang.
     Hugginggpt: Solving ai tasks with chatgpt and its friends in hugging face. Advances in Neural
     Information Processing Systems, 36:38154–38180, 2023.
[38] Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao.
     Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information
     processing systems, 36:8634–8652, 2023.
[39] Peter Steinberger. Openclaw. https://github.com/openclaw/openclaw, 2025.
[40] Qwen Team. Qwen3. 5-omni technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.15804, 2026.
[41] Yuhang Wang, Feiming Xu, Zheng Lin, Guangyu He, Yuzhe Huang, Haichang Gao, Zhenxing
     Niu, Shiguo Lian, and Zhaoxiang Liu. From assistant to double agent: Formalizing and bench-
     marking attacks on openclaw for personalized local ai agent. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.08412,
     2026.
[42] Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le,
     Denny Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models.
     Advances in neural information processing systems, 35:24824–24837, 2022.
[43] Michael Wooldridge and Nicholas R Jennings. Intelligent agents: Theory and practice. The
     knowledge engineering review, 10(2):115–152, 1995.
[44] Peng Xia, Jianwen Chen, Xinyu Yang, Haoqin Tu, Jiaqi Liu, Kaiwen Xiong, Siwei Han, Shi
     Qiu, Haonian Ji, Yuyin Zhou, et al. Metaclaw: Just talk–an agent that meta-learns and evolves
     in the wild. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.17187, 2026.
[45] Tianbao Xie, Danyang Zhang, Jixuan Chen, Xiaochuan Li, Siheng Zhao, Ruisheng Cao, Toh J
     Hua, Zhoujun Cheng, Dongchan Shin, Fangyu Lei, et al. Osworld: Benchmarking multimodal
     agents for open-ended tasks in real computer environments. Advances in Neural Information
     Processing Systems, 37:52040–52094, 2024.
[46] Frank F Xu, Yufan Song, Boxuan Li, Yuxuan Tang, Kritanjali Jain, Mengxue Bao, Zora Z Wang,
     Xuhui Zhou, Zhitong Guo, Murong Cao, et al. Theagentcompany: benchmarking llm agents on
     consequential real world tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.14161, 2024.
[47] Zhengyuan Yang, Linjie Li, Jianfeng Wang, Kevin Lin, Ehsan Azarnasab, Faisal Ahmed,
     Zicheng Liu, Ce Liu, Michael Zeng, and Lijuan Wang. Mm-react: Prompting chatgpt for
     multimodal reasoning and action. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.11381, 2023.
[48] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik R Narasimhan, and Yuan
     Cao. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In The eleventh international
     conference on learning representations, 2022.
[49] Shunyu Yao, Noah Shinn, Pedram Razavi, and Karthik Narasimhan. tau-bench: A benchmark
     for tool-agent-user interaction in real-world domains. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.12045, 2024.
[50] Bowen Ye, Rang Li, Qibin Yang, Yuanxin Liu, Linli Yao, Hanglong Lv, Zhihui Xie, Chenxin
     An, Lei Li, Lingpeng Kong, et al. Claw-eval: Toward trustworthy evaluation of autonomous
     agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.06132, 2026.
[51] Chi Zhang, Zhao Yang, Jiaxuan Liu, Yanda Li, Yucheng Han, Xin Chen, Zebiao Huang, Bin Fu,
     and Gang Yu. Appagent: Multimodal agents as smartphone users. In Proceedings of the 2025
     CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages 1–20, 2025.
[52] Yuxuan Zhang, Yubo Wang, Yipeng Zhu, Penghui Du, Junwen Miao, Xuan Lu, Wendong Xu,
     Yunzhuo Hao, Songcheng Cai, Xiaochen Wang, et al. Clawbench: Can ai agents complete
     everyday online tasks? arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.08523, 2026.


                                                12
[53] Shuyan Zhou, Frank F Xu, Hao Zhu, Xuhui Zhou, Robert Lo, Abishek Sridhar, Xianyi Cheng,
     Tianyue Ou, Yonatan Bisk, Daniel Fried, et al. Webarena: A realistic web environment for
     building autonomous agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.13854, 2023.




                                             13
A     Task Definition Format

A UniClawBench task is generally defined by two files: a single task declaration written in YAML
that fixes the public contract, and a hidden eval_rule.md that specifies the rubric. The executor
sees only the task field rendered into a runtime prompt; the supervisor sees both files and treats the
eval rule as the canonical scoring contract. Appendix A.1 gives the YAML template that fixes the
public contract; Appendix A.2 walks through the semantics of each field; and Appendix A.3 specifies
the nine-section schema of the hidden eval rule.

A.1    Task YAML Template

    Task YAML Template

    task_id: task_NNN_short_slug
    category: <suite_name>
    agent_sys: openclaw
    agent_id: main
    model: claude-opus-4.6

    timeout_seconds: 1200
    max_total_seconds: 1800
    success_threshold: 0.90

    task: |
      <natural-language request shown to the executor>

    task_snapshot: |
      <parallel-safe variant>

    references:
      - references/eval_rule.md
      - references/ground_truth.json
      - ...

    sources:
      - <relative_path>

    skills:
      - <skill_id>

    services:
      - name: <service>
        path: <subdir>
        start: bash install.sh
        oneshot: true

    pre_exec:
      - ops/populate.py
    pre_exec_parallel_safe: true

    codex:
      max_user_followups: 2
      user_simulator:
        policy: |
          <override of the default user-simulator policy>
      supervisor:
        instructions: |
          <task-specific addendum to the default supervisor instructions>



A.2    Field Semantics

Basic definition. task_id is unique within the suite and is also the file stem. category is one of
the five task dimensions from the main paper. agent_sys, agent_id, and model record the default


                                                 14
executor binding when the task is dispatched without an override; cross-architecture and cross-model
sweeps override these at runtime.

Lifecycle. timeout_seconds bounds a single executor cycle. max_total_seconds bounds
the whole-attempt wall clock across all cycles, excluding supervisor and user-simulator turns.
success_threshold is the minimum supervisor score that records the attempt as Pass. The
cycle count is bounded separately by codex.max_user_followups.

Task prompt. task is the literal natural-language request the executor receives, wrapped in a small
runtime preamble that surfaces workspace paths and installed skills. task_snapshot is an optional
snapshot version that consumes snapshot data instead of a live API.

Injections. sources lists files placed under the executor’s workspace mount. skills lists declared
skills; the eval rule for a skill-usage task typically requires transcript evidence that the declared skill
was actually consulted. services entries are docker-compose-style bootstrap services started before
the executor’s first turn (databases, mock APIs, GUI app installers). pre_exec scripts run once after
services are healthy and typically populate session-specific fixture state into live API. references
are hidden judging assets placed under the supervisor’s workspace and never copied into the executor
container.

Supervisor and user simulator. The codex block configures the closed-loop interaction.
max_user_followups bounds the number of follow-up cycles allowed before the runner forcibly
closes the attempt. codex.user_simulator.policy overrides the default user-simulator behavior
policy when a task needs a non-standard interaction style (e.g. a deliberately terse user, a user with
a specific persona constraint). codex.supervisor.instructions appends a task-specific adden-
dum to the default supervisor template, used to highlight checkpoints that are easy to miss without
explicit attention or to narrow down what counts as evidence for an unusual artifact. Both blocks are
optional; when absent, the defaults from Appendix C apply.

A.3   Eval Rule (eval_rule.md) Format
Every task ships a hidden Markdown rubric at references/eval_rule.md. The rubric follows
a fixed nine-section schema: §1–§4 establish the contract, §5–§6 define scoring, and §7–§9 cover
lifecycle policy and asset bookkeeping. The supervisor prompt instructs the supervisor to score using
the lines that appear in §5 and §6, and other parts guide the understanding and flexible judgment.
   Eval rule schema
  ## 1.     Grading Philosophy
  States what the task tests, what is rewarded, and what should not be penalized. Notes the role of declared
  skills.
  ## 2.     Task Contract
  Restates the public prompt with deliverable paths pinned, and separates hard requirements (must produce)
  from soft requirements (must follow these formats).
  ## 3.     Source-Selection and Target-Resolution Rules
  How the supervisor maps executor artifacts to ground-truth entities – alias rules, filename-stem variants,
  numeric tolerance bands.
  ## 4.     Ground-Truth Snapshot
  Pointer to ground-truth files with canonical entity counts and any must-not-appear entities for negative
  checkpoints.
  ## 5.     Checkpoint Rubric
  Numbered scoring lines whose weights sum to 1.00. Each is boolean, graded, or count-based. The
  supervisor scores using only these lines.
  ## 6.     Scoring Policy & Score Caps
  Hard ceilings applied after the §5 sum. A cap is a maximum and cannot raise a §5 sum that is already
  lower.
  ## 7.     Continue vs Fail Guidance
  Score banding for the pass / continue / fail verdicts. The mid-band lets the supervisor request one
  focused follow-up.



                                                     15
    ## 8.      Hidden Reference Assets
    Inventory of supervisor-only files; reaffirms that none are surfaced to the executor or user simulator.
    ## 9.      Dynamic Content Note
    Whether the task is offline (static fixture) or live (consumes an external page that may shift between captures),
    with reconciliation rules for live tasks.


B      Task Examples
This section lists representative task examples from each suite. For every task dimension we show
two prompts. Each prompt is the literal natural-language task field that the executor sees at runtime;
the surrounding YAML schema follows Appendix A.

B.1     Skill Usage

Tasks here ship several declared skills and require the executor to actually consult it. The agent’s job
is to discover the skill, follow its SKILL.md entry-point, and apply the right tool to the provided data.
    task_05_org_chart_mermaid

    Our CEO asked for a governance visualization she can drop into her
    board deck, and I need to pull it from the proxy statement. The
    excerpt lives at
    /tmp_workspace/clawbench/sources/alphabet_def14a_excerpt.md -- use the
    Mermaid diagramming skill to turn it into a clean org chart. She wants
    to see the actual reporting hierarchy -- the solid lines from each
    current director to the board and from each non-CEO executive officer
    to the executive roster -- who sits on which committee across the
    audit, compensation, governance, and executive committees, and the
    dotted advisory or observer relationships that aren't formal seats.
    We also need who chairs what, and any seats that are vacant, interim,
    advisor-only, or recently filled.

    Please render it as Mermaid using graph TD or flowchart TD in
    /tmp_workspace/results/org.mmd, and produce an SVG rendering at
    /tmp_workspace/results/org.svg. Use solid arrows for board and
    executive roster relationships that are explicitly supported by the
    excerpt, dotted arrows for committee memberships and any non-voting
    advisor or observer relationships, and group each committee as a
    subgraph. Distinguish committee chairs visually from regular members
    -- shape or styling is fine. Treat each person as a single node; if
    someone holds multiple roles, draw their relationships from that one
    node rather than duplicating them. Anyone listed as recently-departed
    should not appear as a current node.

    Also save /tmp_workspace/results/governance_matrix.csv so my chief of
    staff can review the extraction without reading Mermaid. Use columns:
    person, source_role, governance_group_or_board, committee,
    committee_role, edge_type, source_quote.


    task_19_github_activity_digest

    I missed the last two weeks of activity on clawbench-activity-fixture
    and need to catch up before the maintainer sync. Build me a 16-day
    activity digest covering 2026-04-10 through 2026-04-25 inclusive --
    use the GitHub skill in our workspace for the API calls. Authenticate
    with the \$GITHUB_TOKEN environment variable and hit the live GitHub
    REST API directly via the gh CLI or curl against api.github.com. Do
    not rely on any local cache or pre-exported snapshot file under
    /tmp_workspace/clawbench for this run; everything must come from a
    fresh API pull covering merged PRs, closed-unmerged PRs, closed
    issues, and commits in that window.



                                                          16
  A few entries in this fixture repo may have been imported by an
  automation account. When a PR or issue body, or a commit message,
  includes an explicit pseudo-user or planned-date note, use that note
  as the contributor and date for the digest instead of the automation
  account's login or the rebuild timestamp.

  Save /tmp_workspace/results/digest.md grouped by contributor. For
  each contributor show: PRs merged, PRs closed without merge, issues
  closed, and commit count. Add a Follow-up Flags section for activity
  that looks risky or needs a maintainer follow-up, including every
  closed-unmerged PR and any revert PR or revert commit. End with a
  Highlights section listing the 5 most recent merged PRs or closed
  issues in the window, newest first. When two highlight events share
  the same date, list the higher-numbered activity first so number 27
  comes before number 13; if the numbers also tie, list the issue
  before the pull request.

  Also save /tmp_workspace/results/activity_index.csv with columns
  activity_type,number_or_sha,title_or_message,contributor,activity_date,status
  covering every merged PR, closed-unmerged PR, closed issue, and
  commit in the 16-day window so I can sort and filter it later. Cover
  the full set of contributors and activity, not a partial sample.



B.2   Exploration
Tasks here are open-ended audits or refactors over noisy and potentially misleading inputs. The agent
must investigate multiple choices, reject incorrect alternatives, and document negative evidence to
distinguish real exploration from a guessed conclusion.
  task_01_zshrc_prompt_refactor

  Your goal is to refactor the injected legacy `.zshrc` into a
  maintainable, low-noise, verifiable zsh configuration. The input file
  is at `/tmp_workspace/sources/existing_zshrc`. This is not about
  writing a new prompt snippet from scratch; you must preserve the real
  behaviors from the original config and eliminate the conflicts it
  already contains.

  Start by auditing the legacy config: identify duplicate PATH entries,
  duplicate PROMPT/RPROMPT definitions, `precmd` overrides, Oh My
  Zsh/plugin load order issues, conda/nvm initialization placement, and
  any fragments that may produce side effects in interactive vs.
  non-interactive shells. Then produce the final `.zshrc`: preserve
  aliases, plugins, PATH prepends, the conda hook, and nvm sourcing;
  the prompt should be concise, showing the current path and git
  status, but must not display username, hostname, time,
  Python/Node/Ruby runtime, full deep paths, or Nerd Font-only glyphs
  by default.

  The final result must be validated with real zsh/git scenarios, not
  static explanations. Cover all eight scenarios: plain shell, git
  clean, git dirty, detached HEAD, rebase/merge state, deep path,
  Python venv active, and non-interactive `zsh -fc true`. Document
  that startup time has not degraded noticeably.

  Save:
  - `/tmp_workspace/results/zshrc_final`
  - `/tmp_workspace/results/zsh_prompt_audit.json`: legacy config
    conflicts, preserved items, removed items, and load-order
    explanation.
  - `/tmp_workspace/results/zsh_prompt_patch_notes.json`
  - Eight render files and `/tmp_workspace/results/zsh_prompt_verification.log`.




                                                 17
  task_18_license_provenance_audit

  Perform an offline open-source license provenance audit. Do not go
  online; the inputs are at:

       /tmp_workspace/sources/license_audit/

  Each package has a package.json/metadata, LICENSE file, README
  excerpt, registry summary, and several source file headers. The
  materials intentionally include traps such as: registry license
  inconsistent with the LICENSE file, dual license, generated/minified
  file headers, vendored third_party code, COPYING.LESSER vs. GPL
  confusion, and misleading README badges. The goal is to determine
  the acceptability of the main package and list file-level exceptions
  requiring legal review.

  Company policy: MIT/Apache-2.0/BSD-2-Clause/BSD-3-Clause/ISC are
  allowed; MPL-2.0 is allowed but requires a notice; GPL/AGPL/strong
  copyleft, unknown licenses, and conflicts between the main package
  LICENSE and the registry must be flagged as review/block.

  Save the following:
  - `/tmp_workspace/results/license_audit_summary.json`: for each
    package, include final_license, policy_decision (allow /
    allow-with-notice / review / block), primary_evidence, conflicts,
    files_requiring_review.
  - `/tmp_workspace/results/license_file_matrix.json`: at least 20
    file/metadata sources, each containing source_path,
    claimed_license, weight, kept_or_ignored, reason.
  - `/tmp_workspace/results/license_rejection_traps.json`: must cover
    README badge, registry mismatch, vendored third_party,
    generated/minified header, COPYING.LESSER/GPL confusion, and
    dual license.
  - `/tmp_workspace/results/license_method.json`: precedence_rules,
    package_scope_rules, policy_mapping, files_read, checked_at.
  - `/tmp_workspace/results/audit_package_licenses.py` and run log.



B.3   Long-Context Reasoning

Tasks here aggregate evidence across many heterogeneous sources or require sustained state tracking
over long action sequences. The difficulty is not retrieving isolated facts but maintaining global
consistency across scattered evidence and producing an auditable synthesis.

  task_03_slack_openclaw_assistant_setup

  I currently use Slack on my phone, and OpenClaw is already installed
  locally, but this OpenClaw assistant has not yet been connected inside
  Slack.

  I watched this video and it seems that Slack integration should be
  possible: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9QpSkGnfKMk . First watch
  the video and generate a Markdown tutorial with screenshots for me.
  Then install or open Slack and log in with the Outlook email address
  `\$EMAIL_ADDRESS`; if a verification code is needed, check it in
  Outlook webmail. If Slack or Outlook shows a CAPTCHA, security check,
  or human verification, follow the page requirements and complete the
  verification yourself. When encountering reCAPTCHA or similar
  verification, complete it yourself and continue; do not wait for me to
  handle it manually. If browser automation cannot obtain clickable
  elements, switch to screenshots, coordinate clicking, refreshing, a
  different browser entry point, or the Slack client entry point and
  continue trying. Only if all these methods are truly impossible should
  you save a blocking screenshot and explanation. After logging in,
  configure or reset an OpenClaw bot/assistant entry and connect local



                                                18
  OpenClaw to Slack.

  Finally, send a test message to OpenClaw in the Slack interface, and
  save screenshots showing that the message was sent successfully and
  that OpenClaw replied correctly. Write the tutorial, configuration
  notes, screenshot paths, and any CAPTCHA/blocking situations
  encountered to `/tmp_workspace/results/slack_openclaw_setup.md`. Do
  not write the email password or verification code into the result
  file.


  task_07_santa_monica_trip_budget

  I want to go to Santa Monica in Los Angeles with a friend for a long
  weekend in July 2026. The dates are fixed: Friday 2026-07-10 to Monday
  2026-07-13, 2 people, flying from SFO to LAX. Please actually research
  and create a complete budget and itinerary plan, but do not pay, book
  tickets, book hotels, rent a car, reserve restaurants, or submit any
  irreversible order. Save all screenshots and documents to
  `/tmp_workspace/results/`.

  For flights, only consider United nonstop. The outbound flight must
  depart SFO for LAX on 2026-07-10 between 09:00 and 11:30; the return
  flight must depart LAX for SFO on 2026-07-13 between 17:00 and 19:30.
  Search once each on Google Flights, Kayak, and Momondo, and record
  1 most suitable result from each platform with a screenshot.

  For lodging, only consider Courtyard by Marriott Santa Monica,
  Hampton Inn & Suites Santa Monica, and Hilton Santa Monica Hotel &
  Suites. Search Booking.com and each hotel's official website for a
  stay from 2026-07-10 to 2026-07-13, 2 people, 1 room. Record room
  type, 3-night total price, whether taxes/fees are included,
  cancellation policy, rating/address, and screenshots.

  For rental cars, only consider LAX pickup and return, pickup at
  2026-07-10 12:30 and return at 2026-07-13 14:30. Search Enterprise
  for Economy, Compact, and Midsize. On Turo, record only the 2 cheapest
  qualifying cars in the search results, without logging in. For
  restaurants, only check Water Grill Santa Monica, Meat On Ocean, Fia
  Santa Monica, Orla Santa Monica, and 1212 Santa Monica, and check
  whether 2 people can reserve dinner between 18:00 and 20:30 from
  2026-07-10 to 2026-07-12.

  Finally generate `/tmp_workspace/results/santa_monica_trip_plan.md`,
  including a daily itinerary, a budget table for flights / hotel /
  rental car / restaurants / parking / gas / activity contingency, and
  two options: budget-saving and comfortable. Try to keep the
  comfortable option's total budget within \$3,200 / 2 people.


B.4   Multimodal Understanding
Tasks here require extracting, interpreting, and generating information grounded in real images,
videos, or audio. The agent must combine visual perception with tool use and content generation
rather than relying on text alone.
  task_01_scaling_laws_figure5_aspect_ratio

  Download the paper "Scaling Laws for Neural Language Models" from
  arXiv, locate the middle "Aspect Ratio" line chart in Figure 5, and
  faithfully recreate it with Python + matplotlib.

  Requirements:
  1. You must find the correct paper yourself and confirm the correct
     page/figure number; do not recreate the wrong chart.



                                              19
  2. The figure should preserve the original axis meanings, logarithmic
     x-axis, three curves for different model sizes, legend, and overall
     style.
  3. Perform at least one "draw the chart, compare it with the original,
     then revise" iteration instead of producing it in one pass.
  4. Save the final deliverables under `/tmp_workspace/results/`,
     including at least:
     - `figure5_aspect_ratio_recreated.png`
     - `figure5_aspect_ratio_recreated.py`
     - `notes.md` (briefly state which paper and figure you confirmed,
       and what revisions you made)


  task_22_met_art_room_match

  Please open the collection pages on The Met website for the following
  three paintings:

  1. Claude Monet -- https://www.metmuseum.org/art/collection/search/437133
  2. Vincent van Gogh -- https://www.metmuseum.org/art/collection/search/436535
  3. Caspar David Friedrich --
  https://www.metmuseum.org/art/collection/search/438417

  Please do the following:

  1. Save at least 1 webpage screenshot for each painting to
     `/tmp_workspace/results/artwork_screenshots/`; the screenshot must
     include both the main image and a clear metadata area. If a single
     screenshot cannot fit both, save an additional supplemental
     screenshot for the same artwork and mark that clearly in the
     filename or notes.
  2. Read `/tmp_workspace/clawbench/sources/my_room_style.json`.
  3. Generate the following in `/tmp_workspace/results/`:
     - `artworks_metadata.csv`
     - `visual_analysis.md`
     - `best_choice_for_my_room.md`
  4. `artworks_metadata.csv` must organize at least these fields:
     - artwork_url, title, artist, object_date, medium, dimensions
  5. `visual_analysis.md` must analyze each painting's:
     - Main color palette and warm/cool relationship
     - Composition
     - Brushwork or surface texture characteristics
     - Overall atmosphere
  6. `best_choice_for_my_room.md` must clearly select the one painting
     best suited to hang in my room, match the artwork's visual
     characteristics to my room conditions point by point, and explain
     why the other two were not selected.


B.5   Cross-Platform
Tasks here require synchronizing state across heterogeneous applications and interfaces – Platform
CLI tools like GitHub CLI, web pages, desktop GUI applications, local files, calendars, citation
managers, and so on. Success depends on preserving evidence and state across platforms, not on
producing a single textual answer.
  task_01_rag_survey_gui_zotero_obsidian

  I have a local PDF from a real RAG survey reading pack and I want it
  moved through a real desktop GUI workflow using Zotero and Obsidian.

  The PDF is available here:
      /tmp_workspace/clawbench/sources/rag_survey_pack/rag_survey.pdf

  Please use the real desktop applications, not a web mock and not just



                                               20
command-line file editing. A setup service installs/verifies Zotero
and Obsidian before you start; if they are still settling, wait
briefly and try launching them again.

- Open and read the PDF with a visible PDF reader or browser PDF
  viewer.
- Launch the real Zotero desktop app. Create one Zotero record for
  the PDF, including the title, authors, year, venue, DOI or arXiv
  ID, citation key, tags, and a useful abstract/summary. Attach the
  local PDF to that Zotero record.
- Export the Zotero item to BibTeX or Better BibTeX-style `.bib` if
  available. The exported citation key should be `gao2024retrieval`.
- Launch the real Obsidian desktop app. Create/open an Obsidian vault
  under `/tmp_workspace/results/rag_survey_obsidian_vault/` and
  create a literature note that links to the Zotero
  record/citation key. The note must capture the paper's objective,
  method, dataset/corpus or review scope, metrics or evaluation
  dimensions, key findings, limitations, and how we could use it in
  a RAG evaluation plan.

At the end I need these files under `/tmp_workspace/results/`:

- `rag_survey_note_export.md`
- `zotero_rag_survey_export.bib`
- the literature note .md inside the vault
- screenshots showing the Zotero record open and the Obsidian note
  rendered.


task_03_rust_tokyo_meetup_gui_calendar

Use real public web pages to organize the Rust Global: Tokyo event
information, then create a reminder event in a real local desktop
calendar GUI.

Verify the information from these real web pages. Do not use a local
simulated site or local mirror page:

- Rust Foundation event page:
  https://rustfoundation.org/event/rust-global-tokyo/
- Event background page:
  https://rustfoundation.org/media/rust-global-tokyo-connecting
  -the-rust-ecosystem-across-industries-regions/
- Registration page:
  https://register.linuxfoundation.org/event/rust-global-tokyo-2025/register
- Venue/travel page:

https://events.linuxfoundation.org/open-source-summit-japan/attend/venue-travel/

For the calendar portion, use GNOME Calendar or an equivalent real
desktop calendar application installed on the system. Do not use
Calendar Mock, and do not only hand-write a calendar file.

Requirements:
1. Confirm the event title, date, official start/end time, venue,
   registration rules, and registration link from the real web pages.
2. Create an event in the real calendar GUI. The title must include
   `Rust Global: Tokyo`.
3. Set the event start time to 30 minutes before the official start
   time, and set the end time to the official end time shown on the
   event page.
4. In the calendar event description, clearly include the venue,
   registration link, and registration/cost requirements.
5. Save a screenshot proving that the event has been created in the
   real calendar GUI: `/tmp_workspace/results/calendar_gui.png`; if
   the calendar supports export, also save



                                         21
       `/tmp_workspace/results/rust_global_tokyo.ics`. An ICS import
       preview, a screen where no calendar has been selected, or a dialog
       where import/save has not been clicked does not count as a created
       event. The screenshot should show the event already present in the
       calendar main view or event details.
    6. Also write an audit JSON file to
       `/tmp_workspace/results/calendar_evidence.json`. Record the
       calendar application used, event title, start/end time, timezone,
       venue, registration link, and evidence file paths. If the event
       is still only pending import, explicitly write `pending_import`
       in the JSON and do not mark it as created.
    7. Use a graphical text editor, for example gedit, to write the
       event summary to `/tmp_workspace/results/rust_global_tokyo.md`.
       Do not copy the page introduction verbatim; summarize the key
       points in your own words.



C     Role Prompts

Three prompts drive every cycle: a session wrapper that frames every role call, the supervisor prompt
that judges the executor’s attempt, and the user simulator prompt that generates the next user turn
when the verdict is continue. All three are reproduced verbatim below. The supervisor and the
user simulator each run in their own isolated workspace that mirrors the executor’s visible artifacts;
only the supervisor’s workspace also contains the hidden judging references. Each prompt requires a
single JSON object in response.
Placeholders enclosed in braces ({role_name}, {role_instructions}, {public_task},
{task_instructions}, {policy}, etc.) are filled in per attempt before the prompt is sent.

C.1    Session Wrapper

The wrapper is the same for the supervisor and for the user simulator: it identifies the role, embeds
the role-specific instructions, and reminds the role about the workspace conventions.

    Session wrapper

    You are Codex session role: {role_name}.

    {role_instructions}

    # Workspace Environment

    You are running inside an isolated workspace that should be treated as
    read-only.
    Use local tools to inspect workspace files before answering.
    Do not use network or external resources. Do not modify files.
    The canonical evidence is in the workspace files, not in this prompt.

    Read `workspace_manifest.json` for the full file inventory and
    `README.md` for file descriptions.

    ## Start With

    {key_files_list}



C.2    Supervisor Prompt

The supervisor prompt is the longer of the two role prompts; it encodes both the judging contract and
the anti-drift rules that keep scoring stable across continuation cycles.



                                                 22
Supervisor

# Identity

You are the hidden answer supervisor for one benchmark attempt.
Your job is to decide whether the executor satisfied the public task.

# Workspace

- Public task: `public_task.md`
- Visible execution evidence: `visible/` directory
- Hidden judging references: `references/` directory
- Task privacy assets (optional): `privacy/` directory -- present only
  for tasks that declared private credentials. These mirror what the
  executor received inside its container. You may read them to verify
  ground truth (e.g. re-run a lookup yourself), but NEVER copy any
  secret value into `rationale`, `missing_artifacts`, or any other
  field that leaves this workspace.

Derive your judging standard from the hidden references, then apply it
to the visible evidence. Your rationale is internal-only and is never
shown to the executor or public user.
{transcript_chunking_note}

# Images

All relevant screenshots and reference images are files inside this
workspace. See `workspace_manifest.json -> available_images` and the
"Available Images" section of `README.md` for the complete list.

**No images are pre-attached to this conversation.** Use the built-in
`view_image` tool to inspect an image whenever its content is material
to your judgement, e.g.:

    view_image(path="visible/result/screenshots/amazon_product.png")
    view_image(path="references/references/reference_frame.png")

Prefer inspecting only the images you actually need to resolve each
checkpoint -- reading every image up-front is wasteful. If a decision
can be made purely from `visible_summary.json`, transcript text, and
`conclusion.md`, do not load images at all.

**`.png` and `.jpg` / `.jpeg` are interchangeable for grading.** Large
PNGs the executor saved are re-encoded as JPEG and renamed to `.jpg`
when they are placed in your workspace, so a file the rubric refers to
as `foo.png` may appear in your `visible/result/` (or `references/`) as
`foo.jpg` -- same content, smaller bytes. Match by filename stem and
semantic content, not by suffix. If the eval rule cites
`visible/result/cover.png` and the workspace has
`visible/result/cover.jpg`, treat them as the same artifact and grade
accordingly. The executor's canonical bit-for-bit original (with the
real format) is preserved at the run's top-level `result/` outside this
workspace, so format-specific checks the rubric does spell out (e.g.
"PNG with alpha channel") can be honored by reading the rubric text,
not by inferring from the filename inside this workspace.

When the hidden rule asks for screenshot evidence, the screenshot
file's presence, filename, saved result text, transcript capture step,
OCR/text summary, and linked source can be enough unless the
checkpoint depends on pixel-level visual content. Avoid opening
social-media, video, login, or people-heavy screenshots just to
confirm that a file exists. If image inspection is unavailable,
continue grading from the non-image evidence and state the limitation
in `rationale`; do not convert that limitation alone into an
`infra_error`.




                                       23
# Task-Specific Instructions

{task_instructions}

# Evaluation Method

1. Read `references/eval_rule.md` as the primary judging spec.
2. Inspect the visible evidence: transcript, tool actions, saved artifacts.
3. Classify the attempt state and assign a score.

## Strict scoring discipline (no rule-invention)

You MUST score using ONLY the rubric lines and Section 6 score caps that
appear in `references/eval_rule.md`. Do NOT invent additional checkpoints,
quality bars, or quality complaints that are not explicitly listed in the
rubric. In particular:

- If a deliverable satisfies every line in Section 5 and triggers no
  Section 6 cap, return `verdict=pass`. Do not deduct points for
  "could be more thorough", "could include more context", or any
  other criterion the rubric did not name.
- If a checkpoint requires a numeric value within a tolerance band,
  use the band literally. Do not silently tighten it.
- If you find an issue that the rubric does not cover, mention it in
  `rationale` for the operator's awareness but do NOT subtract score
  for it. The rubric is the contract.
- Across continuation cycles, do NOT introduce new deductions that
  were not flagged in earlier cycles unless the executor's new
  artifact literally created a new rubric-grounded violation.
  "Gold-plating" the judgement on later cycles is a scoring bug.
- If the executor produces a binary artifact (.docx, .xlsx, .pdf, .db,
  .png) you cannot fully inspect, use the available `python3` runtime
  inside this codex container to extract text/data with the installed
  helpers (`python-docx`, `openpyxl`, `pypdf`/`pdfplumber`, `sqlite3`).
  Do NOT penalize the executor for the absence of pre-extracted text
  -- open the file yourself.

## Attempt States

- `in_progress` -- still exploring, no coherent conclusion yet
- `incomplete` -- partial evidence or answer, needs more proof
- `complete_but_failed` -- has a conclusion, but it is wrong or unsupported
- `complete_and_passed` -- correct conclusion with sufficient evidence
- `terminal_failure` -- unrecoverably wrong
- `infra_error` -- system-level failure

## Verdict Rules

- `pass` -- only when evidence clearly satisfies the hidden judging standard
- `continue` -- for in_progress, incomplete, or recoverable complete_but_failed
- `fail` -- only for terminal_failure or unrecoverable cases
- Prefer `continue` over `fail` when another user turn could help

## Scoring

Score 0.0--1.0 reflecting how close the attempt is to full task completion.
Do not pass on workflow quality alone -- the core result must be verifiable
against hidden references and visible artifacts.
Care more about satisfied checkpoints and supported end results than the
exact click path or exhaustive process proof, unless the hidden task rule
says a path constraint matters for target resolution or safety.

# Output Format

Return exactly one JSON object. No markdown fences. Keys:




                                       24
  - `verdict`: one of pass, continue, fail, infra_error
  - `attempt_state`: one of {attempt_states}
  - `recoverable`: boolean
  - `score`: number 0.0--1.0
  - `confidence`: one of low, medium, high
  - `rationale`: string -- concrete explanation of what is right, wrong, or
    missing. Include specific details (expected items, pages, evidence gaps).
    Do not speculate about why the agent behaved a certain way.
  - `missing_artifacts`: array of safe public artifact names or evidence gaps
  - `guidance_tags`: array of tags from [{guidance_tags}] -- choose only tags
    that match concrete, recoverable, public next-step guidance supported by
    the current visible evidence gap; otherwise return []


Conditional injection: The placeholder {transcript_chunking_note} above is empty for
short runs. When at least one transcript exceeds the chunking threshold and is split into part files,
the supervisor receives the following additional guidance in its place. The guidance prevents the
supervisor from reading every transcript fragment exhaustively, which would exceed its conversation
token budget.
  Transcript chunking note (conditional)

  # Transcript Access (large run)

  The executor transcript for this run was large, so
  `visible/transcript.jsonl` contains only a head + tail capped view with
  a `clawbench_truncation` marker event in the middle. The complete
  transcript is preserved under `visible/transcript_full/`:

  - `visible/transcript_full/manifest.json` -- index listing every part
    with its byte range and event range.
  - `visible/transcript_full/part_001.jsonl`,
    `visible/transcript_full/part_002.jsonl`, ... -- sequential <=80 KB
    slices split at JSONL line boundaries (never mid-line).

  Rules:
  - Default to the capped view in `visible/transcript.jsonl` plus the
    `semantic_transcript_blocks` field in `visible/visible_summary.json`.
    Most judging passes need nothing more.
  - If you genuinely suspect the capped view is missing a specific
    checkpoint piece of evidence, read `manifest.json` first, then cat
    ONE specific `part_NNN.jsonl` file based on the event range you need.
  - **Never** `cat transcript_full/*.jsonl`, loop through all parts, or
    use `find`/`rg` across the whole directory -- doing so exceeds the
    conversation token budget and will fail the request.

  The same rules apply to any `visible/agent_sessions/<agent>/
  transcript_full/` directories that appear in multi-agent (edict) runs --
  each sub-agent transcript may have its own independent chunking.


Default supervisor instructions. The placeholder {task_instructions} above is the supervi-
sor’s task-specific judging guidance for the current attempt. When a task does not supply a custom
block through its YAML, the supervisor falls back to the default instructions below.
  Default supervisor instructions

  You are the hidden benchmark supervisor for one attempt. Build the judging
  standard from `references/eval_rule.md` and any other hidden references, then
  apply that standard to the actual visible evidence from this run. Decide
  whether the public task is truly complete, whether the visible evidence really
  supports the conclusion, whether the saved artifacts are auditable, and whether
  another public follow-up still has a realistic recovery path. Base the verdict
  and score on visible, auditable run evidence, not on workflow quality alone,



                                                 25
  model intent, or the fact that you know the hidden answer. Care more about
  satisfied checkpoints and supported end results than the exact path taken,
  unless the hidden rule says a path constraint matters for target resolution or
  safety. Distinguish carefully between still exploring, missing visible
  evidence, unsupported or mismatched conclusions, recoverable failures,
  unrecoverable failures, and fully completed passing work. Prefer `continue`
  over `fail` whenever the visible public state still leaves a realistic
  next-step recovery path. Use `rationale` to state concrete evidence gaps,
  mismatches, and correctness checks. Focus on what is right, wrong, missing, or
  unsupported; do not speculate about the executor's private thought process. Put
  only safe, publicly actionable evidence gaps in `missing_artifacts`. Never copy
  or leak passwords, secrets, private credentials, hidden-reference contents, or
  any other internal-only detail into fields that leave this workspace.



C.3   User Simulator Prompt

When the supervisor verdict is continue, the user simulator synthesizes the next user message that is
handed to the executor. Its hardest job is voice fidelity: it must not adopt the agent’s internal idiolect,
which can include role-play narration in some agent backends.

   User simulator

  # Identity

  You are the **original end-user (the human)** who submitted the public
  task and who is now asking the AI agent to keep going. You are NOT the
  agent, NOT any sub-agent inside the agent system, and NOT a character
  in any role-play that the agent may have adopted internally.

  Strong rules about your voice:

  - Always speak in **first person, as the user**. Your output is the
    next user turn of the conversation -- it will be handed to the agent
    as the human's next message.
  - Reply in the **same language and register as the Authoritative
    Original Public Task** below (see the section at the end of this
    prompt). If the original task is casual English, reply in casual
    English. If it is plain modern Chinese, reply in plain modern
    Chinese.
  - **Do NOT copy, continue, or mimic any stylized voice the agent
    adopted internally.** For example, a multi-agent backend may
    narrate using an imperial-court metaphor, or an agent may role-play
    as a game character, butler, pirate, etc. These are the agent's
    INTERNAL workflow language -- ignore them for style. You remain a
    normal modern end-user.
  - Do NOT acknowledge or address internal sub-agents by name. You only
    talk to "the agent" / "the assistant" (or just by making a direct
    request).
  - Do NOT quote harness-internal terms: supervisors, scoring, cycles,
    transcripts, hidden references, kanban, subagent, sessions_spawn,
    etc.

  Your job is to write the next user follow-up for this attempt.

  # Workspace

  - Original task: `public_task.md`
  - Visible execution evidence: `visible/` directory
  - Conversation/runtime state: `turn_state.json`, `role_history.jsonl`,
    `supervisor_feedback.json`

  Work only from the files in this workspace.

  # Images



                                                    26
The `visible/` tree may contain screenshots the agent saved
(`visible/result/...` plus the latest desktop snapshot
`visible/runtime_probe_desktop.png`). See
`workspace_manifest.json -> available_images` and the "Available
Images" section of `README.md` for the exact list.

**No images are pre-attached to this conversation.** Use the built-in
`view_image` tool only if you genuinely need to look at a screenshot
to decide whether the agent's state matches what a real user would
see, e.g.:

    view_image(path="visible/result/screenshots/amazon_product.png")

Most turns can be answered from text alone (public task, transcript,
supervisor feedback JSON) -- only load an image when its pixels
actually change your follow-up.

# Behavior Policy

{policy}

# Rules

- Write like a real end-user continuing the conversation. Your output
  is the user's side of the next turn, not an internal status report.
- Assume the agent already saw the original task. Do not repeat it
  unless absolutely necessary.
- Prefer short incremental follow-ups: ask to keep going, double-check
  something visible, or fix a concrete mismatch.
- Make `candidate_feedback` the primary output: it should be a complete,
  self-contained next-step instruction that still works if used alone.
- Do NOT mention supervisors, hidden references, scoring, turns,
  budgets, or internal harness rules.
- Do NOT explain why the agent behaved that way. Only react to the
  public task and visible shortcomings.
- Base your reply only on the current workspace files and visible
  shortcomings.
- Do not invent hidden explanations or speculate about internal reasoning.
- The original public task is authoritative. Never relax or broaden its
  hard constraints.
- **Voice check before you answer**: if your draft reply contains any
  phrase that sounds like an internal agent or a role-play character
  reporting progress, REWRITE it as a normal human user asking the
  agent to keep going. Your follow-up is what the user types into the
  chat, not something the agent or a sub-agent says.

# Authoritative Original Public Task

<<<ORIGINAL_PUBLIC_TASK>>>
{public_task}
<<<END_ORIGINAL_PUBLIC_TASK>>>

# Output Format

Return exactly one JSON object. No markdown fences. Keys:

- `mode`: one of silent, nudge, instruction
- `tone`: one of neutral, firm, urgent
- `candidate_feedback`: a short natural user follow-up that fully points
  to the next concrete step on its own
- `public_feedback_points`: array of key points




                                       27
Default behavior policy. The placeholder {policy} above is the user simulator’s behavior policy
for the current attempt. When a task does not supply a custom policy through its YAML, the user
simulator falls back to the default policy below.
    Default user-simulator behavior policy

    Act as the original end user continuing the same conversation. Look at
    the current visible run state, saved artifacts, page state, and recent
    progress in the workspace. Infer the most likely public reason the task
    is still unfinished, unsupported, or inconsistent, and then write a
    short natural follow-up that pushes the agent to continue the next
    concrete step, fix the issue, gather clearer visible evidence, or save
    the final result. Make `candidate_feedback` a complete, self-contained
    next-step instruction that still makes sense even if it is used on its
    own without any extra bullets. Stay within the original task
    constraints, reply briefly and naturally in the same language as the
    public task, and prefer a concrete next-step nudge over repeating the
    whole task. Do not mention supervisors, scoring, hidden references,
    hidden answers, turns, budgets, benchmark internals, or internal
    reasoning. Do not invent hidden explanations.



D     End-to-End Case Study
We trace one full attempt of task_09_loc_rights_images, an exploration task that the executor
solved in two cycles after a corrective user follow-up. The attempt closed at finalScore = 0.96
(finalStatus = pass). Each subsection mirrors a panel of the run record: task file, eval rule,
cycle-1 executor trace, cycle-1 supervisor verdict, cycle-1 user simulator follow-up, and cycle-2
executor trace + final supervisor verdict.

D.1    Task File

The task asks the executor to select five Library of Congress records with item-level rights statements
clear enough to be re-used. The user voice is direct (“do not simply take the first five search results”)
and the deliverables are specific.
    Task YAML (task_009_loc_rights_images)

    task_id: task_009_loc_rights_images
    category: exploration
    agent_sys: openclaw
    agent_id: main
    model: claude-opus-4.6
    timeout_seconds: 1200
    max_total_seconds: 1800
    success_threshold: 0.9

    task: |
      Your goal is to select 5 records from official Library of Congress
      sources that have sufficiently clear rights statements and genuinely
      accessible image resources. Do not simply take the first five
      search results, and do not treat a thumbnail as evidence of a full
      image.

      Validate each record using the item page, official JSON/API/resource
      fields, IIIF manifest or equivalent image resource, and item-level
      rights statement. Watch for these traps: thumbnail present but full
      image unavailable, collection-level rights not equal to item-level
      rights, ambiguous rights advisory, OCR/text items that are not
      images, and duplicate items for the same image. Each final record
      must include title, date, item id or lccn, record URL, image/IIIF
      URL, rights evidence, dedup key, and an explanation of why it is
      usable.



                                                   28
      Save:
      - `/tmp_workspace/results/fetch_loc_rights_images.py`
      - `/tmp_workspace/results/loc_rights_images.json`
      - `/tmp_workspace/results/loc_image_exclusions.json`
      - `/tmp_workspace/results/loc_images_notes.json`
      - `/tmp_workspace/results/fetch_loc_rights_images_run.log`.

  references:
    - references/eval_rule.md
  services:
    - name: fixture-bootstrap
      path: loc-bootstrap
      start: bash install.sh
  codex:
    max_user_followups: 2


D.2    Eval Rule
The hidden eval_rule.md for this task follows the schema in Appendix A.3. We reproduce §5
(rubric weights) and §6 (score caps) below; the supervisor scores using only these lines.
  Eval rule §5 – checkpoint rubric

  ## 5. Checkpoint Rubric

  Use this rubric as guidance; exact weighting may be adjusted for the
  visible task, but the caps in Section 6 should still apply.

  1. Task completion and correctness (30%) -- The final selected
     records, configuration, archive, shortlist, service demonstration,
     or audit conclusion satisfies the visible task requirements.
  2. Exploration breadth and candidate handling (20%) -- The executor
     explored the required number or variety of candidates / sources /
     tools and documented why alternatives were rejected.
  3. Source and artifact evidence (25%) -- Required outputs exist and
     contain auditable URLs, paths, commands, logs, status codes,
     metadata, checksums, screenshots, or parsed data.
  4. Trap handling and constraints (15%) -- The executor avoided
     forbidden data sources, unsafe behavior, fixture/live-web
     confusion, variant mismatches, stale metadata, or tool limitations
     relevant to this task.
  5. Reproducibility and clarity (10%) -- The saved script / report /
     logs are coherent enough that the supervisor can understand what
     was done without rerunning the entire environment.

  A submission that is correct but poorly evidenced should receive only
  partial credit. A submission that is well documented but reaches the
  wrong target or violates source restrictions should also receive only
  partial credit.


  Eval rule §6 – score caps

  ## 6. Scoring Policy / Caps

  Apply these task-specific caps before assigning the final score:

  - Cap 0.40 if results are simply the first five search hits.
  - Cap 0.55 if thumbnails are treated as full image evidence.
  - Cap 0.70 if rights statements are unclear or not tied to official
    LOC pages.

  General caps also apply:



                                           29
  - Cap 0.30 if the executor ignores the core source restriction of
    the task, such as using live web for an offline fixture task or
    synthetic fixtures for a real-public-web task.
  - Cap 0.40 if required artifacts are largely absent and the
    supervisor can only grade a final narrative.
  - Cap 0.55 if exploration evidence is missing and the result could
    have been guessed or fabricated.
  - Cap 0.65 if key source evidence is not tied to the final selected
    records, variants, files, versions, or service responses.
  - Cap 0.75 if the final answer is mostly correct but lacks negative
    evidence for the major traps described in the task.
  - Cap 0.85 if only minor artifacts, logs, or reproducibility details
    are missing while the main result and evidence are otherwise
    strong.

  Scores near 1.0 should be reserved for submissions that are both
  correct and auditable, with artifacts that directly support the
  final conclusion.


D.3     Cycle 1 – Executor Trace
Table 3 summarizes the first eight assistant turns of cycle 1. The model probes the LOC site, recovers
from a Cloudflare challenge by switching to direct API and HEAD requests, and writes all five
required artifacts.

      Turn   Tool calls                       What the model did
        1    read                             Reads SKILL.md for the agent-browser skill.
        2    exec mkdir                       “Now let me research the LOC API to understand how
                                              to find items with clear rights and accessible images.”
        3    exec agent-browser open          Opens an LOC search page filtered to image media +
                                              public-domain rights.
        4    exec agent-browser snapshot      Tries to take a DOM snapshot.
        5    exec sleep + snapshot            “Cloudflare challenge. Let me wait and try again, or use
                                              the API directly.”
        6    process                          Inspects the running browser process.
        7    exec curl                        Switches to the LOC JSON API directly via curl, by-
                                              passing Cloudflare.
        8    exec curl -I                     HEAD requests against the LOC tile / IIIF service to
                                              verify full image resources actually resolve.

Table 3: Cycle 1 first eight executor turns. The model recovers from the Cloudflare block by switching
probe strategy without giving up.

The remaining turns (not shown) read item-level JSON for each candidate, normalize titles and dates,
dedup by image stem, and write loc_rights_images.json, loc_image_exclusions.json,
methodology notes, the Python script, and the run log.

D.4     Cycle 1 – Supervisor Verdict
The supervisor receives the executor’s full visible trajectory plus the hidden eval rule and ground
truth, and emits one structured decision.
  Cycle 1 supervisor verdict (score=0.65, verdict continue)

  verdict: continue
  attempt_state: complete_but_failed
  recoverable: true
  score: 0.65
  confidence: high
  rationale: |



                                                 30
      All required artifacts are present, and the visible evidence shows
      real LOC exploration via official LOC API endpoints plus direct
      image / IIIF checks. The submission also includes negative evidence
      for major traps in `loc_image_exclusions.json` and methodology
      notes, so it is auditable and clearly not just a bare narrative.

      However, the final selection appears to violate the task requirement
      not to simply take the first five search results: the run log shows
      only page sp=1 was fetched, 25 results were retrieved, and the five
      validated picks were accepted in sequence from that page until the
      quota was reached. The executor later added broader exclusion notes,
      but those were post-hoc and not tied to the actual selection
      process used to choose the final five.

      The exclusions file claims 7 items were excluded but only 1 is
      actually enumerated; the notes mis-classify item 2006686829 as a
      rights-status case rather than a thumbnail / restricted case; and
      the duplicate logic for the two Trail Creek Ranch records is
      asserted rather than evidenced.

      These are recoverable: the executor has the right data and the
      right pipeline. A single follow-up can re-validate against
      item-level JSON and bring the exclusions and notes into internal
      consistency.

  missing_artifacts: []
  guidance_tags: ["fix_internal_consistency", "broaden_candidate_pool"]



D.5    Cycle 1 – User Simulator Follow-up

Because the verdict is continue, the runner launches the user simulator. From the supervisor it
receives only a four-field handoff – verdict, attempt state, recoverability, and score (Appendix D.5);
the supervisor’s rationale, missing_artifacts, and guidance_tags are never forwarded, and
the hidden eval rule is not mounted into the user simulator’s workspace. Together with the executor’s
visible trajectory and saved artifacts, this handoff is the simulator’s complete input.

  user_handoff (cycle 1)

  user_handoff = {
      "verdict":             "continue",
      "attempt_state":       "complete_but_failed",
      "recoverable":         true,
      "score":               0.65
  }


The user simulator’s output, after a deterministic post-rewrite step, is the message in Appendix D.5,
sent to the executor as the next user turn.

  Cycle 1 user simulator follow-up (verbatim)

  Please fix the results by re-validating with official item JSON /
  item pages and replacing anything that was inferred from just the
  first API page.

  In particular, the exclusions file says 7 items were excluded but
  the saved JSON only has 1, the notes misstate LCCN 2006686829 as a
  rights-status case instead of the thumbnail / restricted case, and
  the duplicate logic for the two Trail Creek Ranch records looks
  speculative.

  Update the saved files so all five final records and all exclusions
  are fully supported and internally consistent.



                                                 31
  Turn     Tool calls                            What the model did
       1   exec cat                              Reads          back          its      own          existing
                                                 loc_image_exclusions.json to confirm the
                                                 inconsistency the user described.
       2   exec python3                          “The issues are: (1) exclusions file has 7 hand-written
                                                 entries the script never produced; (2) LCCN 2006686829
                                                 is described incorrectly; ...” Begins a re-validation script
                                                 that fetches official item JSON for every candidate.
       3   exec python3                          “I see an important issue with the Koussevitzky item:
                                                 its rights_advisory field is N/A. . . ” Discovers a real
                                                 issue the user message had not flagged.
       4   process                               Inspects the running fetch process.
       5   exec python3                          “Now I have complete, verified data from the of-
                                                 ficial item JSONs. Key findings: Koussevitzky’s
                                                 rights_advisory is FIELD_MISSING . . . ”
       6   write                                 “The Feraille-o item IS a digitized card catalog,
                                                 not an audio recording.”           Writes the corrected
                                                 fetch_loc_rights_images.py.
           exec python3
       7   fetch_loc_rights_images.py            Runs the corrected pipeline; produces a fresh selection
                                                 of 5, exclusions = 7, with item-JSON-grounded evidence
                                                 for every record.
           exec
       8   cat loc_rights_images.json            Verifies the new selection.
           exec
       9   cat loc_image_exclusions.json         Verifies the new exclusions.
           exec
      10   cat loc_images_notes.json             Verifies the regenerated methodology notes.

Table 4: Cycle 2 executor turns. The model goes beyond the user’s stated complaints, finding two
additional grounded issues (Koussevitzky rights field, Feraille-o item type) and rebuilding the pipeline
rather than patching the saved files in place.



D.6    Cycle 2 – Executor Trace

The executor receives the user-simulator message as its next user turn and runs cycle 2. Table 4
summarizes the ten assistant turns; the model now drives a tightened pipeline that re-fetches official
item JSON for each candidate, discovers two substantive errors that even the user message had not
named, and regenerates all five output files from the corrected pipeline.

D.7    Cycle 2 – Supervisor Verdict

The supervisor’s second decision pushes the score from 0.65 to 0.96, crossing the rubric’s pass band.
The runner records finalScore = 0.96. The user simulator is not invoked again on a pass verdict,
and the attempt closes after exactly two cycles.

  Cycle 2 supervisor verdict (score=0.96, verdict pass)

  verdict: pass
  attempt_state: complete_and_passed
  recoverable: false
  score: 0.96
  confidence: high
  rationale: |
    The visible artifacts satisfy the task and are auditable against
    the rubric. All required outputs are present in `visible/result/`.
    The final selection file contains 5 LOC records, each with title,
    date, item id, record URL, image / IIIF URL, item-level rights-
    statement evidence, dedup key, and usability explanation. The run
    log ties each selected record to an official LOC item JSON URL,
    records access_restricted: false, records the item-level
    rights_advisory, and shows image verification via HTTP HEAD with



                                                  32
      content type and byte size. The Highsmith item also includes IIIF
      evidence. The exclusions file now lists 7 items with concrete
      rejected_reason values that match the trap categories named in the
      task (thumbnail-only, collection-level rights mismatch, OCR-only
      text item, duplicate image stem). Item 2006686829 is now
      classified correctly as a thumbnail / restricted case. The
      Trail-Creek-Ranch duplicate is supported by an explicit
      image-resource path comparison rather than asserted.

      The submission shows real exploration breadth (multiple result
      pages, multiple rights advisories examined), is internally
      consistent across artifacts, and avoids every named trap. A small
      amount of supporting commentary in `loc_images_notes.json` reads
      as inferred rather than directly quoted from the LOC pages, which
      is the only deduction.

    missing_artifacts: []
    guidance_tags: []


D.8    What This Trace Demonstrates
Three properties of the closed-loop design from the main paper are visible in this single attempt:

       1. The supervisor catches recoverable failure modes rather than rejecting them outright.
          Cycle 1 has the right pipeline and the right data; only the selection rigor and the exclusion-file
          consistency are insufficient. Returning continue (not fail) at score = 0.65 preserves
          the executor’s progress while flagging the remediable gap.
       2. The information firewall is structural, not stylistic. The supervisor returns a seven-field
          decision but only four fields cross to the user simulator (Appendix D.5). Hidden judging
          assets are never mounted into the user simulator’s workspace, and a deterministic rewriter
          further sanitizes the simulator’s candidate text. The user simulator’s follow-up reads the
          executor’s own visible files to generate specific follow-up.
       3. Multi-turn recovery is a core capability. The cycle-1 score of 0.65 would have been a fail
          under any single-turn paradigm; cycle 2 reaches 0.96 not by patching the saved files but
          by rebuilding the pipeline from item-level JSON, in the process uncovering two additional
          issues the user message had not named. UniClawBench scores reflect both the model’s
          first-pass and its recovery capabilities.

E     Societal Impacts
This work can have positive societal impact by enabling more realistic and rigorous evaluation of
AI agents in real-world environments, improving their reliability, transparency, and safety before
deployment. By identifying capability gaps, such as weaknesses in long-context and multimodal, it
can guide the development of more robust systems for applications like research assistance, software
engineering, and information processing. However, there are potential risks: the framework could
be used to over-optimize agents for benchmark performance rather than true generalization, or to
accelerate the development of more capable autonomous systems that may be deployed in sensitive
domains without sufficient oversight. Careful use and responsible evaluation practices are therefore
important to mitigate these risks.




                                                    33
