                                                                                                                                       July 17, 2026



                                             ReasFlow: Assisting Reasoning-Centric Scientific Dis-
                                             covery in Applied Mathematics via a Knowledge-Based
                                             Multi-Agent System
                                                          Yutong He1,∗ , Daibo Li1,∗ , Guohong Li1,∗ , Jiahe Geng1,∗ ,
                                                      Zhengyang Huang1,∗ , Can Ren1,∗ , Zekun Zhang2,† , Yifan Liu3,† ,
                                                     Shuchen Zhu1 , Hengrui Zhang1 , Boao Kong1 , Ming Sun1 , Shu Li4 ,
                                                   Chenyi Li1 , Jiang Hu4 , Kun Yuan1,¶ , Zaiwen Wen1,¶ , Pingwen Zhang5,¶
                                                                                      1
                                                                                         Peking University
                                                               2
                                                                University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
                                                                                  3
                                                                                    Beijing Normal University
                                                                                     4
                                                                                       Tsinghua University
                                                                                       5
                                                                                         Wuhan University
                                             Recent advances in Large Language Models have fueled autonomous AI agents capable of tackling




arXiv:2607.14178v1 [cs.AI] 15 Jul 2026
                                             complex scientific tasks, yet existing automated research systems remain predominantly focused
                                             on empirically driven domains with quantitative benchmarks, leaving theory-driven discovery,
                                             particularly in mathematically grounded disciplines requiring rigorous proofs and synthesis of domain
                                             knowledge, largely underexplored. Key challenges include the difficulty of verifying theoretical
                                             reasoning at scale, insufficient reasoning ability for autonomous frontier exploration, and a scarcity
                                             of procedural heuristics in the literature. We introduce ReasFlow, an end-to-end autonomous agent
                                             system for reasoning-centric scientific discovery that operationalizes a collaborative paradigm where
                                             the human expert acts as Principal Investigator while the agent executes rigorous derivations as a
                                             capable graduate student. ReasFlow incorporates (i) a robust internal verification loop that audits
                                             logical coherence and corrects fundamental errors prior to human inspection, and (ii) an automated
                                             knowledge retrieval and self-improvement mechanism that proactively surfaces both declarative facts
                                             and overlooked procedural heuristics, substantially reducing expert intervention. The system unifies
                                             literature synthesis, algorithm design, theorem proving, experimentation, and manuscript preparation
                                             in a single system. Deployed to autonomously generate five complete research papers with rigorous
                                             theoretical and empirical content from minimal prompts, ReasFlow consistently achieves the highest
                                             evaluation scores among state-of-the-art open-access baselines under a curated LLM-based review
                                             rubric. ReasFlow is publicly accessible via the ReasLab platform, providing a collaborative workspace
                                             for AI-assisted theoretical research. Github repo: https://github.com/ReasLab/ReasFlow.git.
                                             ∗
                                                 Equal Contribution, † Work done while interning at Peking University, ¶ Corresponding author




                                         1   Introduction
                                         Motivations and Challenges.      Recent advances in Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated
                                         remarkable capabilities in natural language generation, reasoning, and planning. Coupled with the continued
                                         expansion of context windows, these developments have spurred growing interest in autonomous AI agents
                                         capable of tackling highly complex tasks, spanning competitive mathematics to end-to-end scientific research.
                                         Beyond general problem-solving, AI-assisted research has already yielded breakthrough discoveries [5, 38],
                                         underscoring its transformative potential across specialized domains. Notably, several AI agent systems have
                                         achieved medal-level performance in international Olympiad competitions [17, 36, 43], demonstrating strong
                                         capacity for rigorous logical reasoning and complex task execution. The open-source agent Sci-Master [6]
                                         further showed that inference-time tool augmentation and multi-agent orchestration can attain state-of-the-art
                                         performance on Humanity’s Last Exam [35], establishing a robust reasoning foundation for scientific AI.
                                                                                                                   2




Figure 1 Illustration of traditional AI workflow with human guidance (left) and ReasFlow’s workflow (right). ReasFlow
uses automatic verfication loop and domain knowledge augmentation to reduce continuous human intervention.


Concurrently, fully autonomous research frameworks, including the AI Scientist [31], CycleResearcher [49],
and DeepScientist [50], have begun to automate entire scientific discovery pipelines.
Despite these advances, the predominant focus of automated scientific discovery has remained on empirically
driven research, domains such as machine learning [50, 54], biology [13], and physics [33], where progress is
gauged by quantitative benchmarks and experimental validation. In contrast, autonomous exploration of theory-
driven research remains largely underexplored. In this work, we focus specifically on applied mathematics, a
discipline that occupies a unique position in the research landscape. Unlike pure mathematics, which pursues
abstraction for its own sake, applied mathematics demands tight integration between rigorous theorem proving
and application-driven modeling in areas such as optimization, signal processing, statistical learning theory,
and information theory. In contrast to empirical machine learning research, where progress is measured
primarily by benchmark performance, applied mathematics centers on theoretical contributions, convergence
guarantees, approximation bounds, and complexity characterizations, while relying on numerical experiments
to validate tightness and demonstrate practical relevance. This “theory-first, experiment-supporting” paradigm
distinguishes applied mathematics from both ends of the spectrum and renders existing automated research
systems, which are designed either for competition-style problem solving or for benchmark-driven empirical
workflows, inadequate for this domain.
Unlike mathematical competition problems, which are framed around well-specified questions with clearly
defined targets, applied mathematical research is typically more open-ended: it requires synthesizing diverse
domain knowledge across subfields (e.g., convex analysis, probability theory, and functional analysis may all
be needed within a single proof), and it seeks broader conceptual insights accompanied by rigorous guarantees.
For instance, analyzing the convergence rate of an optimization algorithm may involve constructing a suitable
Lyapunov function, managing cascading inequality relaxations, and reasoning carefully about how different
structural assumptions, such as strong convexity versus mere smoothness, affect the final bound. Existing
automated research systems are not designed with such theoretical development in mind; the constituent
agents in prior frameworks [31, 49, 50] lack specialized support for theorem proving, and the high-quality
output they generate remains centered on empirical performance rather than foundational theory.
Developing AI-assisted systems for reasoning-centric research in applied mathematics presents several
formidable challenges. First, verifying theoretical reasoning is intrinsically difficult. Unlike empirical research,
where performance can be quantitatively benchmarked, proofs expressed in natural language lack reliable
mechanisms for automated verification at scale. Beyond correctness alone, evaluating a theoretical contribution
                                                                                                                3


in applied mathematics also requires a multidimensional assessment: the tightness of derived bounds, the
parsimony and reasonableness of assumptions (e.g., whether a Lipschitz continuity assumption is necessary or
can be relaxed), and the broader significance of the result relative to existing theory. Second, the reasoning
capabilities of current LLMs remain insufficient for frontier applied mathematical research without substantial
expert guidance. Existing models are generally trained on broad, general-purpose corpora and lack systematic
exposure to the specialized knowledge required for deep mastery of specific mathematical subfields. As a result,
they cannot independently acquire the nuanced background knowledge, such as classical proof techniques in
convex optimization, standard bounding arguments in high-dimensional statistics, or established conventions
in approximation theory, that underpins theory-driven applied mathematical research. Consequently, frontier
reasoning-centric exploration cannot proceed autonomously and remains critically dependent on human
expertise and supervision. Sustained multi-turn interaction is therefore essential, as experts must iteratively
provide domain-specific context, correct misaligned assumptions, and steer the reasoning process toward viable
directions. This dependence on continuous human intervention limits the degree of end-to-end automation
achievable in empirically driven workflows.
Methodology. This paper proposes several designs to address these challenges. First, we introduce a robust
internal verification loop into the agentic LLM system, enabling the agent to audit its own derivations
before human inspection. This mechanism checks logical coherence, computational accuracy, and the validity
of inequality relaxations, operations that are pervasive in applied mathematical proofs, such as bounding
techniques, asymptotic analysis, and convergence rate derivations, while also detecting subtle issues such
as implicit assumptions, loose bounds, and algebraic inconsistencies. By filtering out basic errors, it allows
experts to focus on higher-level conceptual validation. Second, to reduce the need for continuous expert
intervention, we replace live expert guidance with a domain-specific knowledge retrieval system. Rather than
relying on experts to identify gaps and supply missing context, the agent actively retrieves the heuristics,
proof techniques, and methodological conventions needed at each step of reasoning from a knowledge base.
For example, when proving convergence of a first-order method, the agent can retrieve established potential
function construction strategies or known descent lemma variants, rather than requiring an expert to suggest
them in real time. This shifts the workflow from expert-driven correction to agent-driven knowledge acquisition,
substantially reducing the researcher’s cognitive burden. Finally, we emphasize that AI-assisted discovery
remains inherently human-in-the-loop: the expert acts as a Principal Investigator, providing strategic direction
and final judgment, while the AI serves as a capable Research Assistant, carrying out rigorous derivations and
synthesizing domain-specific insights under supervision.
Constructing a knowledge base for reasoning-centric agents in applied mathematics is itself non-trivial. Manual
curation is prohibitively expensive, and even the scientific literature contains subtle but consequential logical
flaws, making it difficult to build a reliable gold-standard dataset. Moreover, much of the informal knowledge
that drives theoretical discovery in applied mathematics, such as intuitions about when a particular relaxation
will be tight, failed proof attempts that reveal structural obstacles, and heuristic shortcuts for constructing
auxiliary functions, is rarely documented in published work, leaving open the question of how it should be
formalized and quality-controlled for machine use. Broadly, the required knowledge falls into two categories:
declarative domain knowledge, including explicit facts, definitions, and established theorems (e.g., classical
convergence results, standard inequality chains, well-known counterexamples) that the agent can recognize
as missing and actively retrieve; and procedural heuristics, which consist of practical reasoning know-how
rather than explicit facts, including experience-based strategies (e.g., “try a quadratic Lyapunov function first
for strongly convex objectives”), proof insights (e.g., “decouple the bias and variance terms before bounding
each separately”), and cautionary patterns (e.g., “this relaxation loses a logarithmic factor; check whether it
matters for the final rate”) that the agent may fail to use because it does not recognize their relevance in the
current reasoning context. Addressing this blind spot therefore requires mechanisms that can proactively
surface relevant procedural knowledge without explicit prompts.
To circumvent these hurdles, we propose a systematic solution that automates the optimization of both
knowledge extraction and retrieval procedures. The approach leverages the reasoning capabilities of LLMs
to autonomously inspect and refine deficiencies in the extraction and retrieval pipelines, iterating until a
measurable evaluation criterion is satisfied, for instance, until the agent’s reasoning performance under internal
knowledge retrieval matches that achieved under direct expert guidance. Importantly, this self-improvement
                                                                                                               4


loop also learns to associate subtle contextual cues with the need for procedural heuristics, enabling the system
to retrieve and apply overlooked techniques even when the agent does not initially recognize their relevance.
By grounding the process in an end-to-end performance metric rather than explicit manual verification of
extracted knowledge, the framework avoids the intractable challenge of defining and evaluating informal
knowledge representations, while ensuring that both declarative and procedural knowledge are effectively
mobilized to support rigorous theoretical reasoning.
Contributions. Grounded in this perspective, we introduce ReasFlow, an end-to-end autonomous AI agent
system for reasoning-centric scientific discovery in applied mathematics. ReasFlow implements a collaborative
workflow in which the human researcher provides high-level ideas and supervisory oversight, while the agent
independently carries out the labor-intensive stages of the research pipeline. The system includes dedicated
modules for literature survey, algorithm design, theorem proving, experimental evaluation, manuscript writing,
and self-review. By integrating these components, ReasFlow addresses a key limitation of prior automated
research systems, which have focused primarily on empirically verifiable domains, and extends autonomous
scientific discovery to the theory-driven paradigm characteristic of applied mathematics.
To validate ReasFlow, we used it to develop five theoretically significant algorithms and turn them into complete
research papers in applied mathematics. Specifically, ReasFlow autonomously: (1) designed an accelerated
distributed algorithm for stochastic strongly convex optimization that, for the first time, matches the lower
complexity bound for this problem class [42]; (2) developed a low-rank communication-compressed algorithm
for federated learning that achieves a faster theoretical convergence rate than prior human-designed methods
[64]; (3) introduced a momentum-compatible extension that overcomes a key limitation of existing low-rank
compression methods in federated learning [16]; (4) proposed a distributed Muon optimizer for large-scale
language model training that improves upon the best-known theoretical convergence rate of previous human-
designed algorithms [59]; and (5) developed the first retraction-free decentralized optimization algorithm over
the Stiefel manifold [24]. All five works provide rigorous convergence guarantees and comprehensive empirical
evaluations, collectively spanning distributed optimization, federated learning, manifold optimization, and
LLM post-training.
Remarkably, these advances emerged from minimal initial prompts and only a small set of core references,
with ReasFlow autonomously conducting most of the algorithm design, theoretical analysis, experimentation,
and manuscript preparation. We further benchmarked ReasFlow against several state-of-the-art open-source
and publicly accessible AI research agents using identical initial prompts. A specialized LLM-based reviewer
evaluated all outputs according to a carefully curated rubric. ReasFlow achieved the highest overall scores
on theory-oriented research tasks and consistently received perfect scores from Gemini-3-Pro. These results
demonstrate that ReasFlow can autonomously produce substantial theoretical advances and, in several cases,
surpass the best results previously achieved by human experts in reasoning-intensive domains that have largely
remained beyond the reach of automated research systems. Our contributions are summarized as follows:
   • Systematic Enhancement of Reasoning Capabilities for Applied Mathematics. We propose a principled
     framework for improving the theoretical rigor of AI research agents through integrated verification loops
     and automated domain-knowledge infusion, targeting the core bottlenecks of theory-driven discovery in
     applied mathematical research.
   • End-to-End Autonomous Research System. We develop ReasFlow, an open-source AI assistant that uni-
     fies literature synthesis, algorithm design, theorem proving, experimentation, and manuscript preparation
     within a knowledge-based multi-agent system tailored to the applied mathematics research paradigm.
   • Comprehensive Benchmarking and Evaluation. We introduce a multidimensional evaluation protocol
     to empirically compare ReasFlow with existing open-access AI research agents. The results show that
     ReasFlow consistently achieves superior generation quality and greater theoretical depth on applied
     mathematics research tasks.
ReasFlow is currently integrated into the ReasLab platform1 , where it is freely accessible to the public. Within
ReasLab, each research project is associated with a dedicated workspace that stores all artifacts generated by
ReasFlow, including literature summaries, algorithm drafts, proof sketches, experimental logs, and manuscript
  1 https://model.reaslab.io
                                                                                                                                                                             5


                                                                  C: Num Experiments                               & K D W * 3 7   * 3 7     
                                          D: Theory-Exp Consist                                                    & K D W * 3 7  3 U R   * 3 7      3 U R 
                                                                                                                   * H P L Q L      3 U R
                                                                                                                   & O D X G H  3 U R   & O D X G H  2 S X V     
                                                                                            B: Originality         & \ F O H 5 H V H D U F K H U  0 /    %
                                                                                                    100            ' H H S 6 F L H Q W L V W   * 3 7     
                                                                                                                   $ ,  6 F L H Q W L V W  Y    * 3 7     
                                                                                              80
                            E: Writing & Present                                                                   $ 5 , 6   * 3 7     
                                                                                       60                          5 H D V ) O R Z   * 3 7     
                                                                                40
                                                                           20
                                                                                                       A: Math Rigor


                               F: References


                                                                                            I: AI & Ethics

                                           G: Internal Consist
                                                                   H: Visual Quality


    Figure 2 Radar chart comparing ReasFlow with baseline workflows across nine evaluation dimensions (A–I).


revisions. Users can inspect and edit these artifacts manually at any time, upload additional reference
materials, and seamlessly resume collaboration with the agent. Interaction with ReasFlow resembles working
with a research copilot: the user provides high-level research questions and periodic guidance through natural
language dialogue, while the agent autonomously advances through literature survey, method development,
theorem proving, experimentation, and manuscript writing, depositing its outputs directly into the shared
workspace for review and iteration. Source codes, artifacts and review details for our experiments are available
on Github: https://github.com/reaslab/ReasFlow.git.

2   Related Work
AI-Assisted Scientific Research. The pursuit of autonomous scientific discovery has motivated the development
of end-to-end agentic frameworks that seek to automate the full research lifecycle, from hypothesis generation
to manuscript preparation. Lu et al. [31] introduced AI Scientist, a pioneering closed-loop system that
combines automated experimentation with peer review; this framework was later extended in AI Scientist-v2
through agentic tree search [54]. In parallel, several studies have focused on the iterative improvement
of research quality. CycleResearcher [49] implements an automated generation-and-review loop driven by
iterative preference learning, DeepScientist [50] targets the end-to-end discovery of state-of-the-art algorithms,
and ML-Master [29] integrates MCTS-based exploration with steerable reasoning to automate machine
learning engineering. Meanwhile, Agent Laboratory [40] and AI co-scientist [13] further explore human-in-the-
loop research workflows, emphasizing goal alignment and iterative feedback. Beyond these comprehensive
frameworks, specialized agents have also been developed to address specific bottlenecks in the research process.
For high-fidelity information retrieval and synthesis, PaperQA2 [41] and OpenScholar [3] achieve strong
performance in citation-grounded question answering and literature synthesis, while AutoSurvey [47] provides
a systematic solution for large-scale automated survey generation. Further upstream in the research pipeline,
Idea2Story [53] helps transform abstract ideas into more concrete and actionable research directions.
Despite this rapid progress, existing AI-assisted scientific research systems remain primarily oriented toward
empirically driven research and often lack support for rigorous mathematical derivation and theorem proving.
ReasFlow is designed to address this gap by enabling the autonomous generation of rigorous theoretical results
and complex proofs, thereby extending AI-assisted discovery to theoretically demanding domains.
AI-Assisted Mathematical Reasoning. Advances in large language models (LLMs) have extended automated
reasoning from basic arithmetic to increasingly complex mathematical tasks. One prominent line of work
focuses on competition-level challenges by augmenting models with heuristic search and test-time scaling,
as exemplified by systems such as AlphaGeometry [43] and AlphaProof [18], which achieved silver-medal
performance at the International Mathematical Olympiad (IMO). Similar efforts including Kimina Prover [45],
DeepSeek-Prover-V2 [37], BFS Prover [51], BFS Prover V2 [52], Goedel Prover [27], Goedel Prover-v2 [28],
Seed Prover [9], Seed Prover 1.5 [8], and LongCat-Flash-Prover [46] typically combine LLM reasoning with
formal verification in Lean, and are actively advancing automated solving on benchmarks such as miniF2F [61]
                                                                                                                 6


and PutnamBench [44]. Li et al. [26] further extends to physics and chemistry Olympiads following a
multi-agent paradigm. Similarly, M2F [48] demonstrates that LLMs can automatically formalize textbooks
and research papers into buildable Lean projects.
In parallel, LLM-based systems have begun to tackle research-level problems, ranging from human-guided
collaboration to fully autonomous verification. Bubeck et al. [5] report several case studies in which GPT-5,
under expert supervision, contributed key insights to open problems in combinatorics and online optimization.
Li et al. [23] proposed a human-in-the-loop proving workflow, illustrated through Riemannian optimization
for Grover’s quantum search. Pushing further toward autonomy, Feng et al. [11] introduced Aletheia, a
natural-language agent that iteratively generates, verifies, and revises solutions, achieving strong results on the
FirstProof [1] benchmark and producing one fully autonomous research paper. While Aletheia operates entirely
in natural language, Ju et al. [22] pursue a complementary direction by tightly coupling informal reasoning
with formal verification in Lean 4, autonomously resolving a decade-old open problem in commutative algebra.
Their system, Matlas [21], searches over a knowledge base of definitions and theorems, whereas ReasFlow is
designed to leverage a richer body of domain knowledge that encompasses implicit insights and heuristic cues
not easily captured from proofs. Beyond solving given problems, another line of work targets autonomous
mathematical discovery: FunSearch [38] and AlphaEvolve [34] demonstrate that LLM-guided search can
produce verifiable new results and provably correct algorithms in an end-to-end manner.
A common feature of these systems is their focus on well-formulated problems with clearly specified assumptions
and conclusions. Many scientific research tasks, however, are both open-ended and ill-defined: the appropriate
hypotheses, the form of the desired result, and even the criteria for a meaningful contribution may not
be known in advance. Addressing such tasks requires not only mathematical reasoning but also scientific
judgment, particularly the ability to distinguish genuinely nontrivial structural insights from routine or trivial
observations. ReasFlow is designed for this broader setting, aiming to autonomously formulate research
questions and produce rigorous theoretical results without relying on pre-formalized problem statements.
LLM-Based Automatic Evaluation and Review. The growing scalability and reasoning capabilities of LLMs
have led to their increasing use as automated judges and reviewers in scientific workflows. Early foundational
work by Zheng et al. [62] showed that strong proprietary models can function effectively as judges, exhibiting
high correlation with human preferences in open-ended generation tasks. Building on this foundation,
subsequent research has developed specialized systems for scholarly review that leverage LLMs’ ability to
provide structured critique. Chu et al. [10] proposed PRE, which aggregates judgments from multiple models
to mitigate individual bias, while Idahl & Ahmadi [19] and Gao et al. [12] showed that fine-tuned agents or
multi-agent ensembles can deliver diverse and professionally rigorous assessments of scientific manuscripts. In
addition, systems such as those introduced by Zhu et al. [63] demonstrate that incorporating explicit literature
retrieval and evidence-based argumentation can yield more reliable and verifiable review comments.
These advances strongly motivate the verification loops used in ReasFlow, suggesting that LLMs can serve
as effective internal critics for iterative refinement. At the same time, ensuring fair and robust evaluation
remains a key challenge. While Ye et al. [57] and Li et al. [25] identified task-specific distortions and prompt
sensitivity, they also showed that these risks can be mitigated through careful system design. Ye et al. [58]
and Lou et al. [30] further highlighted the value of structured benchmarks such as AAAR-1.0 and explicit
evaluation rubrics in reducing favoritism and manipulation. Building on these insights, ReasFlow adopts
a multi-criteria evaluation protocol based on standardized scientific rubrics to make its automated review
process more impartial and better aligned with expert expectations. Taken together, these studies suggest
that, with appropriate verification mechanisms, LLM-based judges can offer a scalable and credible alternative
for high-stakes scientific evaluation.

3   ReasFlow System
We introduce ReasFlow, a multi-agent system tailored for reasoning-centric scientific research in applied
mathematics, particularly in domains that require algorithmic design, theoretical convergence analysis, and
numerical experimentation. ReasFlow encompasses the essential stages of the research process: (i) conducting
literature surveys, (ii) designing algorithms, (iii) developing convergence proofs, (iv) performing numerical
                                                                                                               7




                                 Figure 3 Illustration of the ReasFlow system.


experiments, and (v) writing academic papers. Each stage is supported by specialized agents that incorporate
domain-specific knowledge and can operate either autonomously or with human-in-the-loop interaction.
With ReasFlow, researchers can conveniently translate their ideas into academic papers by providing simple
descriptions and optionally related references. The system also supports flexible control and precise refinement
based on user feedback, allowing adjustments when certain procedures are not sufficiently satisfactory. To
enhance reasoning performance in specific research areas, users can further employ ReasFlow to extract
knowledge cards that complement the built-in knowledge, for instance, in distributed optimization.

3.1   System Overview
ReasFlow is a multi-agent system that coordinates the full research pipeline for reasoning-centric scientific
discovery in applied mathematics. As illustrated in Fig. 3, the system is orchestrated by a central MetaAgent,
which interacts with the user to clarify the research topic, generates a structured research plan, and se-
quentially invokes specialized sub-agents: SurveyAgent, AlgorithmAgent, ProverAgent, ExperimentAgent,
IntroductionAgent, and WritingAgent.
Each agent is powered by a large language model and operates within a shared workspace, with access to basic
utilities (ReadFile, WriteFile, EditFile, RunTerminalCmd) for file manipulation and command execution.
Moreover, different agents are equipped with different specialized tools. To manage task complexity and
context-length constraints, each agent has two auxiliary mechanisms: skills, which return predefined prompts
that impart specific in-context capabilities, and sub-agents, which allow an agent to delegate tasks to another
specialized agent while maintaining isolated memory states. Taking the ProverAgent as an example, we
provide it with a specialized tool to download arXiv papers for reference, a carefully designed skill to generate
search queries, and sub-agents with clean contexts for mathematical proving and verfication.
A key component of the system is a built-in repository of knowledge cards for applied mathematics. This
retrieval mechanism enables agents to draw upon domain-specific heuristics beyond their base training, and
the system can further incorporate user-provided knowledge to extend its applicability, see Sec. 3.2 for more
detailed discussions.
ReasFlow provides an automatic running scheme centered on MetaAgent as the orchestrator. The MetaAgent
workflow proceeds as follows. Upon user approval of the research plan, the SurveyAgent is invoked to conduct
a literature survey and produce a draft of the Related Work section. The AlgorithmAgent then generates
candidate algorithms, writes pseudocode and a Python implementation, performs preliminary verification,
and produces a report for the Method section. Next, the ProverAgent establishes convergence theorems
                                                                                                             8


Algorithm 1 Automatic Prompt Refinement for CardGeneratorSkill
 1: Input: Initial prompt s0 ∈ S, reference paper set R ∈ R, proof task T ∈ T , iteration counter k ← 0
 2: Compute baseline proof p⋆ = Φbase (R, T )
 3: while true do
 4:   Extract knowledge cards Ck = Ψ(sk , R)
 5:   Generate current proof pk = Φcards (Ck , T )
 6:   if Ω(pk , p⋆ ) = false then
 7:      Update prompt sk+1 = Υ(sk , R, Ck , pk , p⋆ )
 8:      k ←k+1
 9:   else
10:      break
11:   end if
12: end while



with full proofs, outputting a comprehensive LaTeX report. The ExperimentAgent subsequently designs and
executes numerical experiments, including ablation studies, and generates a draft of the Experiment section.
Finally, the IntroductionAgent drafts the introduction, and the WritingAgent integrates all components
into a polished manuscript. ReasFlow also supports an alternative scheme where users directly interact with
Sub-Agents to achieve flexible execution. Moreover, it enables a human-in-the-loop workflow in which domain
experts can intervene at any stage, for example, collaborating with the ProverAgent to refine proof strategies
or relax overly restrictive assumptions.
Detailed tool specifications and default workflows for each agent are provided in Sec. 4 and Appendix A.

3.2   Knowledge Augmentation
A central limitation of general-purpose large language models (LLMs) in reasoning-centric tasks is their
lack of structured, domain-specific strategies. While models such as GPT-5.1 or Gemini-3-Pro can attempt
convergence proofs using basic techniques, they frequently struggle to identify the correct analytical pathways
needed for tight theoretical results without expert guidance.
Motivating Example: Stochastic Independence. We empirically observe that current LLMs often mishandle
dependencies among stochastic variables. They may either apply lemmas requiring independence when the
condition is unsatisfied, or overlook independence where it holds, leading to unnecessarily weak bounds.
Consider independent stochastic vectors g1 , g2 , . . . , gn with expectation g⋆ ∈ Rd and bounded variance
E[∥gi − g⋆ ∥2 ] ≤ σ 2 . A sharp bound can be derived via:
                                                           n
                                                           X
                                                  2          1                             σ2
                                      E[∥ḡ − g⋆ ∥ ] =               2
                                                                       E[∥gi − g⋆ ∥2 ] ≤      ,
                                                           i=1
                                                                 n                         n
                 Pn
where ḡ := n1    i=1 gi .   In contrast, LLMs frequently default to applying Cauchy’s inequality, yielding the
looser bound:
                                                                 n
                                                           1X
                                       E[∥ḡ − g⋆ ∥2 ] ≤         E[∥gi − g⋆ ∥2 ] ≤ σ 2 .
                                                           n i=1
While correct proofs can be elicited under direct human supervision, such guidance is impractical to provide
for every proof step in an automated pipeline.
Knowledge Cards. To address this, ReasFlow introduces knowledge cards, simple text files that encode
targeted, contextual reasoning patterns and problem-solving heuristics. The content of a knowledge card
varies by task. For the ProverAgent, cards emphasize general proof patterns and heuristics, focusing on how
to prove results for problems with specific structural characteristics. For the SurveyAgent, cards prioritize
factual details and connections between literature. We posit that a knowledge-augmented agent can achieve
performance comparable to that of a non-augmented agent operating under direct, real-time expert guidance.
                                                                                                                 9


Algorithm 2 Automatic Prompt Refinement for CardRetrieverSkill
 1: Input: Initial prompt s0 ∈ S, proof task T ∈ T , ground-truth knowledge card set C⋆ ∈ C for T , iteration
       counter k ← 0
 2: Compute baseline proof p⋆ = Φcards (C⋆ , T )
 3: while true do
 4:   Generate query qk = Θ(T, sk )
 5:   Retrieve knowledge cards Ck = Λ(qk )
 6:   Generate current proof pk = Φcards (Ck , T )
 7:      if Ω(pk , p⋆ ) = false then
 8:        Update prompt sk+1 = Υ̃(sk , Ck , C⋆ , pk , p⋆ )
 9:        k ←k+1
10:   else
11:      break
12:   end if
13: end while



Challenges in Knowledge Extraction and Retrieval. Effectively augmenting the ProverAgent with knowledge
cards presents two primary challenges:
      1. Quality control in knowledge extraction. Proof techniques are often implicit. A poorly constructed card
         may describe its applicable scope too loosely, leading to inappropriate application, or too restrictively,
         limiting generalization. Thus, identifying which techniques to encode and how to describe them for
         correct generalization is non-trivial.
      2. Effective retrieval of relevant cards. Even with high-quality cards, retrieving the correct ones at the
         right time remains difficult. LLMs tend to be overconfident in their reasoning abilities. For a proof task
         requiring approximately five domain-specific cards, models often perform only one or two searches and
         may decline to read retrieved cards, judging them as trivial or relying solely on their abstracts. This
         behavior undermines the benefits of knowledge augmentation.
Automatic Prompt Refinement. To overcome these challenges, we design an automatic refinement procedure
for the skill prompts of CardGeneratorSkill and CardRetrieverSkill, analogous to optimizing model
parameters. Formally, let S be the set of all possible skill prompts, R the set of reference paper sets, T the
space of target proof tasks, P the space of generated proofs, and C the space of knowledge card sets. Define:
      • Φbase : R × T → P: generates a baseline proof p⋆ ∈ P using original reference paper set R ∈ R.
      • Φcards : C × T → P: generates a proof p ∈ P given knowledge cards C ∈ C.
      • Ψ : S × R → C: extracts knowledge cards C ∈ C from R ⊆ R using prompt s ∈ S.
      • Ω : P × P → {true, false}: compares whether pk ∈ P is at least as good as p⋆ ∈ P.
      • Υ : S × R × C × P × P → S: updates the prompt sk+1 ∈ S by analyzing deficiencies in pk ∈ P relative
        to p⋆ ∈ P.
Algorithm 1 formalizes the iterative refinement of the CardGeneratorSkill prompt.
Similarly, we refine the CardRetrieverSkill prompt. Let Q be the set of all knowledge-search queries.
Define:
      • Θ : S × T → Q: formulates a query q ∈ Q for task T using prompt s ∈ S.
      • Λ : Q → C: returns knowledge cards retrieved in response to q ∈ Q.
      • Υ̃ : S × C × C × P × P → S: updates the prompt by comparing retrieved card set Ck ∈ C and proof
        pk ∈ P against ground-truth card set C⋆ ∈ C and proof p⋆ ∈ P.
Algorithm 2 details this iterative process.
                                                                                                                  10




Example Knowledge Card

Id: TECH-DISTRIBUTED-VARIANCE-REDUCTION
Type: proof technique
Domain: optimization
Title: Distributed Variance Reduction (Linear Speedup)
Description: A fundamental technique for analyzing distributed/parallel stochastic algorithms. It leverages the
independence of stochastic noise across N workers to reduce the variance of the aggregated gradient by a factor
of 1/N, leading to linear speedup.
Tags: optimization, distributed-learning, federated-learning, variance-reduction, linear-speedup
Problem Pattern:
- "Analyzing convergence of distributed SGD or Federated Averaging."
- "Need to show that using N workers provides 1/N reduction in noise variance."
- "Standard Jensen’s inequality bound (||mean||2 <= mean(|| ||2 )) is too loose and loses the 1/N factor."
- "Aggregating independent zero-mean stochastic vectors."
Structural Prerequisites:
- "Noise vectors xi_i must be zero-mean: E[xi_i] = 0."
- "Noise vectors across workers must be independent: E[<xi_i, xi_j>] = 0 for i != j."
- "The aggregation operation is a simple average: 1/N sum(xi_i)."
Execution Logic:
- step: "Decomposition into Mean and Noise"
  detail: "Decompose the stochastic update vector into its expected value (drift/signal) and zero-mean noise. Do
  NOT apply norm bounds to the whole sum immediately."
  algebraic prototype: "v_i = bar{v} + xi_i"
- step: "Orthogonality of Independent Noise"
  detail: "Expand the squared norm of the sum of noise vectors. Use the independence property to eliminate
  cross-terms E[<xi_i, xi_j>] = 0."
  dependency check: "Requires independence of noise across workers."
  algebraic prototype: "E[||sum xi_i||2 ] = sum E[||xi_i||2 ]"
- step: "Variance Reduction Scaling" detail: "Apply the 1/N2 factor from the averaging operation to the sum of
  N variances. This results in a 1/N scaling factor for the final variance."
  algebraic_prototype: "E[||1/N sum xi_i||2 ] = 1/N2 * N * sigma2 = sigma2 / N"
- step: "Handling Bias/Drift Terms"
  detail: "For the bias/drift part (non-random or correlated), use standard inequalities (Jensen or Cauchy-
  Schwarz) which do not provide 1/N reduction. Combine with the reduced variance term."
  algebraic prototype: "E[||Update||2 ] <= ||Drift||2 + sigma2 /N"
Assumptions Required:
- "Independent Noise"
- "Unbiased Estimators (for the noise part)"
- "Bounded Variance"
Expected Outcome Form: "Variance term scales as O(sigma2 / N) instead of O(sigma2 )."



                          Figure 4 Example card extracted by refined skill prompts.
                                                                                                               11




                               Figure 5 Workflow illustration of the SurveyAgent.


Example Output. We present the extracted knowledge card corresponding to the motivating example in Fig. 4.
As shown, the card accurately captures the logical structure underlying the proof technique and provides
precise yet general descriptions of the scenarios in which it is applicable. The core information focuses on
when and where the technique should be applied, thereby enabling the agent to retrieve this knowledge even
when it is not explicitly aware of the specific technique itself.
Remark. We empirically observe that after refinement of the skill prompts, the ProverAgent equipped with
built-in knowledge cards achieves performance comparable to the agent with direct access to original reference
papers. This outcome substantiates the efficacy of the proposed domain knowledge augmentation method
in addressing two fundamental challenges inherent to constructing reasoning-oriented knowledge bases from
literature. First, by synthesizing knowledge cards through LLM-driven comprehension of the source material
rather than surface-level extraction, the approach effectively reveals the often implicit high-level insights that
underpin formal proofs but remain tacit in the original exposition. Second, the workflow’s reliance on the
agent’s autonomous verification loop during proof reconstruction (see Sec. 4.3) provides a practical safeguard
against errors or specious claims that may be present in the published literature. More broadly, this finding
highlights the potential of our method to enhance the reasoning capabilities of large language models in
specialized domains by bridging the gap between informal scholarly discourse and rigorous, verifiable inference.

4     Agent Specifications
In this section, we elaborate the design of all the sub-agents, including the workflow and knowledge augmenta-
tion approaches for the SurveyAgent, AlgorithmAgent, ProverAgent, ExperimentAgent, IntroductionAgent
and WritingAgent.

4.1   Survey Agent
The SurveyAgent conducts comprehensive literature reviews on a given topic. By default, the MetaAgent
invokes it first, as its task, identifying relevant references and drafting the Related Work section, depends
least on the outputs of other agents. The agent retrieves papers from both a built-in FAISS vector database,
which indexes knowledge cards for papers in the target domain, and online sources via the Semantic Scholar
Graph API. In addition, the agent can query individual paper metadata, citation networks, and reference lists
through dedicated literature tools. A complete list of tools is provided in Appendix A.
Workflow. As illustrated in Fig. 5, the SurveyAgent proceeds through four stages upon receiving a user
prompt:
    1. Outline writing: The agent identifies the survey topic and invokes OutlineWriterTool to produce a
       structured outline in the workspace.
    2. Survey composition: It calls LiteratureSearchTool to locate additional papers beyond the internal
       database, then uses SurveyWriterTool to generate a comprehensive survey report drawing from both
                                                                                                              12




                            Figure 6 Workflow illustration of the AlgorithmAgent.


      sources.
  3. Related work drafting: The agent first activates BibtexFormattingSkill to enable standard bibtex
     writing, and then calls RelatedWorkWriterTool to produce a draft of Related Work with correctly
     formatted citations.
  4. Quality review: The agent invokes ReviewTool to automatically evaluate the drafted Related Work
     along four dimensions: format integrity (e.g., Bibtex field validation and cite-key consistency), citation
     relevance, key reference coverage, and instruction following. If the review score falls below the acceptance
     threshold, the agent iteratively revises and re-reviews the draft until quality requirements are met.
Throughout this process, the user may inspect any generated files in the workspace to verify progress and
intervene if necessary.
Knowledge Augmentation. To support effective literature reviews, we construct knowledge cards for each
paper in the database and index them using a FAISS-based vector store with sentence-transformer embeddings.
Each card encapsulates not only basic metadata (title, URL, and citation information) but also analytical
insights such as strengths and weaknesses. The agent queries this database via PaperLibrarySearchTool to
retrieve semantically relevant cards for the target topic. This structured representation enhances both the
efficiency and quality of the survey process within the target domain, and improves the precision with which
the agent describes individual papers when drafting the Related Work section.

4.2   Algorithm Agent
The AlgorithmAgent designs, implements, validates, and reports a new algorithm end-to-end based on a user
prompt, which may be provided directly or generated by the MetaAgent. A complete list of tools is provided
in Appendix A.
Workflow. As illustrated in Fig. 6, the agent proceeds through several stages:

  1. Initialization: The agent sets up the coding environment, identifies the core algorithmic idea, and prepares
     the workspace.
  2. Knowledge search: It invokes KnowledgeCardSearch to locate prior work and extract critical structural
     components, which inform the subsequent pseudocode design.
                                                                                                             13




                              Figure 7 Workflow illustration of the ProverAgent.


  3. Pseudocode generation: The agent performs algorithmic design and leverages the LatexWriterAgent
     to typeset formal pseudocode.
  4. Python implementation: It writes the algorithm and simple test scripts, then conducts quick experiments
     by executing the scripts and visualizing training dynamics via SmartPlotTool.
  5. Result verification: The agent checks experimental outputs against expected behavior using the
     ImageReaderTool. The agent checks experimental outputs against expected behavior through the
     results in json file. If validation fails, the process loops back for refinement; otherwise, it proceeds to
     finalization.
  6. Finalization: The agent compiles a final report, summarizing the algorithmic idea, pseudocode, imple-
     mentation details, and experimental results, using the LatexWriterAgent. All artifacts are stored in
     the workspace.
Throughout the process, the user may inspect progress artifacts and intervene if necessary.
Knowledge Augmentation. Knowledge cards for the AlgorithmAgent are constructed from research papers to
capture key aspects of proposed algorithms, including pseudocode, advantages, and convergence properties.
The agent consults these cards via KnowledgeCardSearch to access critical algorithmic design knowledge,
accelerating principled design choices, guiding pseudocode synthesis, and providing reference criteria for
automated verification.

4.3   Prover Agent
The ProverAgent establishes theoretical convergence results for a given algorithm through mathematically
rigorous proofs. The entire process is carried out via natural language reasoning; consequently, even a
successfully generated theoretical report may still contain errors, and human evaluation remains necessary to
ensure correctness. A complete list of tools is provided in Appendix A.
Workflow. As illustrated in Fig. 7, the agent proceeds through the following stages:

  1. Initialization: The agent checks workspace status, records the problem details, and prepares necessary
     files.
  2. Reference preparation: It uses RefDownloaderSkill to obtain required materials and MathContentSearch
     to locate relevant sections, definitions, and prior results.
                                                                                                              14




                          Figure 8 Illustration of the automatic verification procedure.


  3. Knowledge extraction: The agent creates customized knowledge cards using CardGeneratorSkill,
     summarizing critical lemmas, assumptions, and proof strategies. This stage is primarily for domain
     knowledge extraction and may be optionally skipped.
  4. Proof planning: The agent searches for and reads relevant knowledge cards using KnowledgeSearchTool
     and CardRetrieverSkill, then generates a draft proof plan including both the general framework and
     detailed sub-steps.
  5. Prover stage: Guided by LemmaProverSkill, the agent leverages the LemmaProverAgent to generate
     draft proofs for individual lemmas or theorems. By default, only one statement is proved at a time to
     prevent error propagation.
  6. Verifier stage: The agent calls the LemmaVerifierAgent to check for logical soundness, gap-free
     reasoning, and adherence to the proof plan. If issues are detected, the process loops back to the prover
     stage for refinement.
  7. Finalization: Once all proofs are completed, the agent generates a comprehensive final report including
     the problem statement, assumptions used, and the statements and proofs of all lemmas, theorems, and
     corollaries.
Throughout the process, the user may inspect progress artifacts, knowledge cards, proof plan, draft proofs,
verification logs, and the final report, and intervene if necessary.
Automatic Verification. Beyond basic syntax and consistency checks, the LemmaVerifierAgent is designed to
address a critical pain point in automated mathematical reasoning: the subtle gap between a proof that looks
correct and one that is truly rigorous. LLM-based proof generators often produce arguments that appear
plausible but contain hidden flaws, e.g., unjustified inequality relaxations, tacitly assumed preconditions, or
steps that skip essential justifications. As illustrated in Fig. 8, The verifier tackles these challenges through
three distinctive design choices.
First, it performs context-aware verification. Unlike a standalone checker, LemmaVerifierAgent loads not
only the candidate proof but also the original problem description, previously proven lemmas, and any
cited references. This allows it to detect mismatches such as invoking an unproven lemma, using symbols
inconsistent with prior definitions, or assuming a property that has not been established.
Second, it explicitly audits tightness. In many proofs, a valid but overly loose bound still yields a correct
statement qualitatively, yet renders the result non-publishable because the convergence rate or complexity
                                                                                                                 15




                             Figure 9 Workflow illustration of the ExperimentAgent.


becomes suboptimal. The verifier flags such “correct but weak” steps, e.g., replacing a fine-grained bound
with a coarse universal constant where the problem demands sharp dependence on the number of clients or
condition number.
Third, it adopts a zero-tolerance policy: any identified issue, regardless of perceived severity, results in a FAIL.
This conservative criterion is motivated by the observation that in mathematical research, a single overlooked
flaw, such as a missing intermediate inequality or an incorrectly computed coefficient, can invalidate an
entire contribution. Consequently, the LemmaVerifierAgent rejects proofs that contain unstructured thinking
traces (e.g., chain-of-thought remnants embedded in the proof file), ambiguous notation, or even a single step
lacking explicit justification. The rejected proof is returned to the LemmaProverAgent with a detailed issue
report, initiating a revision loop that continues until the proof meets the required standard of rigor. Empirical
results from our case studies show that this strict verification loop catches common pitfalls, including cyclic
dependencies, hidden assumptions, and mishandled boundary cases, that would otherwise remain undetected
by surface-level checks.
Knowledge Augmentation. Unlike other agents that rely primarily on factual information, the ProverAgent
requires high-level insights that underpin the logical structure of proofs and the specific techniques used to
complete them. These insights are often implicit and must be inferred rather than directly extracted. For
instance, current LLMs frequently mishandle dependencies among stochastic variables, either misapplying
independence lemmas or overlooking independence where it holds, leading to suboptimal bounds. Our
approach extracts useful proof techniques from existing papers and encodes them as knowledge cards to
enhance reasoning capabilities. The challenges of quality control in extraction and effective retrieval, along
with the automatic prompt refinement procedures addressing them, were detailed in Sec. 3.2.

4.4   Experiment Agent
The ExperimentAgent designs, implements, conducts, and verifies computational experiments for a target
algorithm, producing reproducible code, publication-ready figures, and a comprehensive final report that
serves as the draft for the Experiment section. A complete list of tools is provided in Appendix A.
Workflow. As illustrated in Fig. 9, the agent proceeds through the following stages:

   1. Initialization: The agent sets up the coding environment and organizes the workspace.
   2. Experiment planning: It searches prior knowledge and designs the experimental setting, datasets, metrics,
      baselines, and hyperparameters, using KnowledgeCardSearch.
                                                                                                             16




                           Figure 10 Workflow illustration of the IntroductionAgent.


  3. Dataset preparation: The agent downloads required datasets via TerminalCommandTool.
  4. Coding stage: It writes runnable experiment scripts and organizes them in the workspace.
  5. Experiment conduction: The agent executes scripts, tunes hyperparameters with AutoTuningTool, and
     produces visualizations using SmartPlotTool.
  6. Result verification: It checks whether results meet expected criteria using PlotAnalysisTool. It checks
     whether results meet expected criteria. If issues arise, the process loops back for refinement.
  7. Finalization: The agent compiles a comprehensive report, experiment plan, datasets, configurations,
     results and figures, and key insights, using the LatexWriterAgent.
Throughout, the user may inspect downloaded data, experiment codes, figures, verification logs, and the final
report to intervene if needed.
Knowledge Augmentation. The ExperimentAgent leverages knowledge extracted from existing papers in two
key aspects. First, it learns conventional experimental design choices from knowledge cards, enabling it to
propose plans that align with academic standards, including target tasks, appropriate datasets, and commonly
used baseline algorithms. Second, the pseudocode embedded in these cards allows the agent to efficiently
implement baseline algorithms without downloading and analyzing the full original papers.

4.5   Introduction Agent
The IntroductionAgent synthesizes research progress and composes a comprehensive Introduction section
for the paper. By default, the MetaAgent invokes it prior to the WritingAgent, as the introduction requires
outputs from both the ProverAgent and ExperimentAgent to accurately summarize contributions. To reliably
extract structured information from prior agents’ outputs, the IntroductionAgent is equipped with a suite of
dedicated extraction tools that parse survey reports, method descriptions, experimental results, and theoretical
contributions into structured summaries, preventing hallucination by grounding all content in source materials.
Beyond generation, the agent incorporates an automated evaluation–refinement loop: a dedicated evaluation
tool assesses the generated introduction along three quality dimensions, and a refinement tool performs
targeted local edits on low-scoring aspects while preserving high-quality content. A complete list of tools is
provided in Appendix A.
Workflow. As illustrated in Fig. 10, the agent proceeds through the following stages:

  1. Initialization: The agent checks workspace status, reads progress documents generated by previous agents,
     and invokes extraction tools, ExtractSurveyInfo, ExtractMethodInfo, ExtractExperimentInfo, and
     ExtractTheoryInfo, to parse each document into structured summaries of background, methods, results,
     and theoretical contributions.
                                                                                                             17




                              Figure 11 Workflow illustration of the WritingAgent.


  2. Information integration: It calls OrganizeExtractedInfo to synthesize the collected materials, identify-
     ing key contributions, research gaps, and the logical flow that motivates the work.
  3. Introduction writing: The agent determines an appropriate writing style based on the research topic,
     choosing among an ML style (hook→background→gap→contribution), a Math style (hook→objective→
     background→related work→gap→contribution→notation), or a Default style (hook→background→survey
     →gap→contributions), and invokes IntroductionWriterTool to generate the LaTeX draft with inline
     hallucination annotations that flag any claims not directly supported by the extracted materials. The
     agent optionally supplements references using LiteratureSearchTool (Google Scholar as primary,
     Semantic Scholar as fallback) and BibtexFormattingSkill.
  4. Evaluation: After writing, the agent invokes EvalIntroduction to assess the generated introduction
     via a three-stage pipeline. First, it performs a structured decomposition of the reference .tex files
     (experiment sections, proof sections, related work sections) into categorized claims with importance labels
     (critical, important, supplementary). Second, it extracts all contribution and factual statements
     from the generated introduction as prediction claims. Third, it evaluates three quality dimensions
     via LLM-as-a-judge: coverage (structure-aware weighted coverage of reference content), faithfulness
     (fraction of claims supported by source materials), and content quality (six sub-dimensions assessing
     domain clarity, algorithmic detail, background completeness, core idea prominence, goal specificity, and
     substantiveness). The evaluation produces a structured JSON report with per-dimension scores and
     an overall score, along with a three-tier threshold verdict (auto_refine below 0.60, suggest_refine
     below 0.75, good otherwise).
  5. Refinement: Based on the evaluation report, the agent invokes RefineIntroduction to perform
     targeted local edits on low-scoring dimensions. The tool first generates a structured refinement plan
     (identifying specific paragraphs and issues), then executes local rewrites guided by six hard constraints:
     no unsupported technical details, no alteration of contribution semantics, no fabricated numerical
     results, no forged citations, no structural reorganization, and consistent citation formatting. The
     original file is automatically backed up, and a line-level diff summary is produced for user review. This
     evaluation–refinement cycle can be iterated until quality thresholds are met.
Knowledge Augmentation. Similar to the SurveyAgent, the IntroductionAgent is augmented with a built-
in database of knowledge cards that encapsulate materials helpful for accurately describing each paper’s
contribution, including its strengths and weaknesses. This structured knowledge enables the agent to provide
fair and precise descriptions when citing existing work.

4.6   Writing Agent
The WritingAgent assembles and polishes the draft materials generated by preceding agents into a complete,
publication-ready academic paper. It adopts a two-tier architecture: a Coordinator that plans the paper
structure, dispatches chapter-level tasks, and integrates the final manuscript; and multiple SubWriter instances
that work on individual chapters in parallel. A complete list of tools is provided in Appendix A.
                                                                                                               18


Workflow. As illustrated in Fig. 11, the default workflow proceeds as follows:

    1. Initialization: The Coordinator explores the workspace, reads the asset inventory, and copies the
       venue-specific LaTeX template suite (document class, style files, and a pre-configured main.tex with
       conditional-inclusion guards) into the output directory.
    2. Parallel chapter writing: The Coordinator plans the chapter structure, assigns specific asset files to each
       chapter, and dispatches writing tasks to SubWriter instances via DispatchTask. Each SubWriter inde-
       pendently collects and merges its assigned materials, writes the chapter .tex file, compiles, and visually
       verifies the output. Multiple SubWriters run concurrently; as each chapter completes, the Coordinator
       incrementally performs cross-chapter coherence editing (adding cross-references and transitions).
    3. Integration and compilation: The Coordinator integrates all chapters into main.tex, merges bibliogra-
       phy files, and compiles the full paper, iteratively fixing all errors and warnings until a clean build is
       achieved.
    4. Review and revision: The Coordinator invokes ReviewCompleteness to identify structural issues
       and missing content, addresses every reported item, then invokes ReviewWritingQuality to ob-
       tain multi-reviewer feedback and revises accordingly. A final page-by-page visual inspection with
       ScreenshotAnalysisTool ensures correct layout. Steps 3–4 are repeated until the paper is ready for
       publication.
Knowledge Augmentation. To support coherent and format-compliant writing, we construct modular knowledge
documents for the WritingAgent, including an asset-handling guide that specifies how to incorporate various
file types (e.g., .tex proofs, .bib references, images, and experiment reports), venue-specific formatting rules
for different publication outlets, and chapter-compilation scripts for assembling multi-section manuscripts.
Users can further extend this knowledge base by adding custom skills. The agent accesses these documents
through skills, enabling it to apply correct formatting, manage cross-references and assets, and structure
multi-chapter papers consistently. This knowledge augmentation significantly improves the adherence to
target venue requirements and reduces manual intervention in the document assembly process.

5     Experiment
The primary goal of ReasFlow is to assist researchers in autonomously exploring promising research ideas and
producing academic papers, with a broad focus on reasoning-intensive problems in applied mathematics. To
assess its effectiveness across diverse applied mathematics settings, we use ReasFlow to generate five high-
quality research papers spanning federated learning, decentralized signal processing, manifold optimization,
and LLMs fine-tuning. These areas encompass a wide range of theoretical and computational challenges
arising in statistical learning, networked systems, numerical optimization, and large-scale machine learning.
We then evaluate ReasFlow’s overall performance by comparing it with several publicly available AI research
systems, including AI Scientist-v2 [54], Cycle Researcher [49], DeepScientist [50], and ARIS [56]. Finally,
we assess the capabilities of ReasFlow’s individual sub-agents by benchmarking each of them against the
corresponding baselines.

5.1   Case Studies: End-to-End Discovery
To assess ReasFlow’s capacity for autonomous research across diverse areas of applied mathematics, we
conducted five case studies spanning federated learning, decentralized signal processing, manifold optimization,
and LLM fine-tunings under two distinct interaction paradigms. In the first three cases, human experts
interacted directly with individual specialized sub-agents, providing each with a concise research idea and a
small set of key references. Under this direct-prompting workflow, the sub-agents carried out their respective
stages of the research pipeline, including literature review, algorithm design, theoretical analysis, experimental
validation, and manuscript preparation, using GPT-5.1 as the LLM backbone. A representative interaction log
for this workflow is provided in Fig. 12. In the remaining two cases, human experts interacted exclusively with
the MetaAgent, which autonomously coordinated the required specialized sub-agents, as illustrated in Fig. 13.
Across all five cases, human intervention after generation was limited to minor presentational refinements that
did not alter the technical substance.
                                                                                                             19


5.1.1   Mode I: Direct Prompting with Specialized Sub-Agents (Case 1-3)
Case 1: Momentum-Compatible Federated Subspace Optimization. The first paper, [16], investigates how
federated optimization can be performed efficiently within dynamically evolving low-dimensional subspaces.
By projecting the original high-dimensional problem onto a sequence of lower-dimensional subproblems, the
proposed method substantially reduces both client-side optimizer memory and client-server communication.
Its key algorithmic contribution is a subspace update mechanism that remains compatible with momentum,
overcoming a fundamental limitation of previous federated subspace methods. Building upon [55] and [15],
                                                                                                    √ the
AlgorithmAgent designed the algorithm, while the ProverAgent established a convergence rate of O(1/ N T ),
explicitly demonstrating linear speedup with respect to the number of clients N .
The ExperimentAgent evaluated the method on MNIST using a three-layer MLP. At a compression ratio of
1/7, the proposed algorithm achieved a final test accuracy of 0.9511 ± 0.0028, comparable to uncompressed
FedAvg-M (0.9551±0.0015) and substantially outperforming memory-efficient baselines, including FedLoRA-M
(0.9247 ± 0.0063), FedMef (0.8965 ± 0.0062), NeuLite (0.8923 ± 0.0055), and FederatedSelect (0.8759 ± 0.0060).
Ablation studies further confirmed its robustness under severe data heterogeneity. To the best of our knowledge,
[16] is the first federated subspace optimization method that simultaneously supports momentum, reduces
memory and communication costs, and provides convergence guarantees with linear speedup.

Case 2: Heterogeneity-Corrected Primal-Dual Lite Federated Learning. While the first case focuses on
momentum-compatible optimization in low-dimensional subspaces, the second paper, [64], addresses a distinct
challenge: correcting client drift under data heterogeneity without compromising the efficiency of subspace
optimization. The paper develops a primal-dual federated subspace framework that combines low-dimensional
updates with a heterogeneity-correction mechanism. A central technical challenge is preserving accumulated
correction information as the active subspace evolves. To address this challenge, the AlgorithmAgent designed
a backfill-style update that transfers residual primal-dual information across  √ successive subspaces. The
ProverAgent established a non-asymptotic convergence rate of Õ(1/T + σ/ N KT ), where N denotes the
number of clients, K the number of local updates, T the number of communication rounds, and σ 2 the
gradient variance. This guarantee exhibits linear speedup with respect to both client participation and local
computation. Most notably, it strictly improves upon the best convergence rate previously established√for
human-designed federated subspace methods. For example, the method in [60] achieves a rate of O(1/ T )
in the deterministic setting with σ = 0, whereas the algorithm generated by ReasFlow [64] achieves the
sharper rate of O(1/T ). This result provides a compelling example of ReasFlow autonomously discovering an
algorithm with a theoretical guarantee that surpasses the prior state of the art.
The ExperimentAgent validated the algorithm on two fronts: a controlled matrix-regression toy problem
and a ResNet-110 benchmark on CIFAR-100. Over 100 training epochs, the proposed method achieved
a final test accuracy of 45.43%, surpassing FedAvg (34.35%) and FedSub (23.17%), while narrowing the
gap to full-dimensional SCAFFOLD (52.92%). Ablation studies confirmed stability across varying subspace
dimensions and data heterogeneity. Together, these results demonstrate that the proposed subspace method
combines superior theoretical guarantees with strong empirical performance under heterogeneous federated
learning settings.

Case 3: Topology-Independent Decentralized Muon Optimizers for Training LLMs. The third paper, [59],
addresses a fundamental challenge in extending Muon, a recently developed optimizer for LLM training that
orthogonalizes matrix-valued updates using the nonlinear matrix-sign operator msgn, to sparse peer-to-peer
networks. Because msgn does not commute with gossip averaging, Muon cannot be directly integrated
into standard decentralized optimization methods. The proposed approach makes two main contributions.
First, the AlgorithmAgent developed a general primal-dual framework parameterized by (A, B, C) that
systematically integrates Muon with a broad family of classical decentralized algorithms. The framework
recovers EXTRA, ED/D2 , and gradient tracking as special cases, while carefully sequencing decentralized
communication and matrix polarization to resolve the noncommutativity between msgn and network averaging.
Second, the ProverAgent established a topology-separated convergence rate of O T −1/4 in nuclear-norm
geometry. Crucially, the leading-order term is independent of the network topology. This result improves
upon the strongest convergence guarantee previously established for human-designed decentralized Muon
                                                                                                                 20



                      Generation Process: Direct Interaction with Sub-Agents

                                 Conduct survey on the given topic.                                     User

   SurveyAgent            A detailed survey report, together with a draft LaTeX file for Related
                          Work section.

                                 Design the algorithm based on existing materials.                      User

   AlgorithmAgent          A high-quality pseudocode, presented in a draft LaTeX file for Method
                           section.

                                 Establish the convergence theory for the provided algorithm.           User

                           High-quality assumptions, lemmas, theorems, corollaries and proofs,
   ProverAgent
                           formalized into a draft LaTeX file for Theory section.

                                 Conduct experiments to validate the performance of the provided
                                                                                                        User
                                 algorithm.

                           High-quality codes, data, figures, formalized into a draft LaTeX file
   ExperimentAgent
                           for Experiment section.

                                 Summarize the contributions and write introduction based on the
                                                                                                        User
                                 existing materials.

   IntroductionAgent       A draft LaTeX file for Introduction section.

                                 Formalize existing materials into an academic paper using the given
                                                                                                        User
                                 LaTeX template.


   WritingAgent            A complete academic paper without visual issues or cross-reference
                           mistakes.



Figure 12 The process of generating high-quality research papers by directly interacting with ReasFlow’s sub-agents.
Each sub-agent is not limited to a single trial. Refinements are allowed based on the user feedback.

                                                              
methods [14], whose leading term scales as O T −1/4 /(1 − β) , where 1 − β measures network connectivity.
As the network becomes increasingly sparse and β → 1, the factor 1/(1 − β) can become prohibitively large.
In contrast, the leading convergence rate of [59] remains unaffected by network sparsity.
The ExperimentAgent validated the effectiveness of the proposed method for LLM fine-tuning and further
revealed the regime-dependent effects of network topology. The proposed variants matched DeMuon on
a ring-network benchmark (ATC-GT: 45.56% vs. 45.50%) and in near-IID GPT-2 training on WikiText-2
(ED: 18.1396 vs. 18.1401). On a 20-node non-IID CIFAR-100 benchmark trained for 100 epochs, both ED
and ATC-GT substantially outperformed DeMuon (ED: 52.89%, ATC-GT: 48.58%, and DeMuon: 43.94%).
These results demonstrate that the proposed framework preserves Muon’s effectiveness for large-scale model
training while delivering substantial improvements in challenging decentralized settings characterized by sparse
connectivity and heterogeneous data.
                                                                                                                21



                      Generation Process: MetaAgent-Orchestrated Workflow

                                Conduct research on the given topic.                                    User

                           A detailed research plan including details for survey and algorithm
   MetaAgent
                           design.

                                Continue (with or without comments).                                    User

                           A detailed survey report, a high-quality pseudocode, LaTeX drafts
   MetaAgent               for Related Work and Method sections, and a detailed research plan
                           for theory, experiment and writing.

                                Continue (with or without comments).                                    User

                           High-quality theoretical results with proofs, experimental codes and
   MetaAgent               results, LaTeX drafts for Theory, Experiment and Introduction sec-
                           tions, and a complete academic paper.



Figure 13 The process of generating high-quality research papers by interacting with the MetaAgent. Refinements are
allowed based on the user feedback.


5.1.2   Mode II: MetaAgent-Orchestrated Workflow (Case 4–5)
Case 4: Optimal Acceleration for Decentralized Stochastic Signal Processing. The fourth paper, [42],
addresses the challenging problem of accelerating decentralized stochastic gradient descent, a fundamental
computational primitive in decentralized signal processing. Acceleration in this setting is particularly difficult
because stochastic gradient noise and imperfect communication introduce two coupled sources of error.
Consensus errors accumulate across the network and interact with stochastic noise, while momentum-based
acceleration can amplify both errors and destabilize the optimization process. Moreover, the algorithm
must simultaneously achieve fast optimization in terms of the condition number L/µ, efficient information
propagation governed by the network spectral gap 1 − β, and optimal dependence on the noise level σ 2 and
the number of nodes n.
Under the orchestration of the MetaAgent, ReasFlow built upon prior work on accelerated distributed methods
and fast gossip [4, 20, 39] to develop Multi-Gossip Accelerated DSGD (MG-ADSGD). The proposed algorithm
combines Nesterov-type primal-dual extrapolation with multiple rounds of accelerated gossip averaging in each
outer iteration. Under smoothness, strong convexity, and bounded-variance assumptions, the ProverAgent
established the non-asymptotic complexity
                                                      s           !
                                                 2
                                            e  σ        L     1
                                           O        +      √        .
                                               µnϵ       µ 1−β

This guarantee matches, up to logarithmic factors, the fundamental lower bound
                                                    s         !
                                             σ2       L    1
                                        Ω̃       +       √
                                            µnϵ       µ 1−β

for decentralized stochastic strongly convex optimization. The analysis constructs a coupled Lyapunov
function that simultaneously tracks optimization progress and network disagreement, carefully controlling the
interaction among stochastic noise, momentum
                                        √     amplification, and communication error. It further identifies the
optimal communication depth R = O(1/ e    1 − β), which balances accelerated optimization with network-wide
                                                                                                               22


Table 1 Scores of the generated papers reviewed by the PaperReviewAgent. We use GPT-5.1, GPT-5.4, and
Gemini-3-Pro as the reviewers’ LLM backend, respectively. Bold: best; underlined: second best.

             AI Agent \Reviewer Backend           GPT-5.1    GPT-5.4     Gemini-3-Pro      Average
             ChatGPT (GPT-5.3)                      51.7        32.2           29.8          37.9
             ChatGPT Pro (GPT-5.4-Pro)              62.4        44.5           41.9          49.6
             Gemini (Gemini-3.1-Pro)                51.5        31.4           35.1          39.3
             Claude Pro (Claude Opus 4.6)           64.4        32.9           61.4          52.9
             CycleResearcher-ML-12B                 34.6        19.1           10.1          21.2
             DeepScientist (GPT-5.4)                71.9        56.6           43.5          57.3
             AI Scientist-v2 (GPT-5.4)              60.6        34.7           29.6          41.6
             ARIS (GPT-5.4)                         59.3        52.9           38.6          50.3
             ReasFlow (GPT-5.4)                     80.5        65.6           87.6          77.9



information propagation. To the best of our knowledge, [42] is the first decentralized stochastic optimization
method to attain this lower complexity bound. It therefore strictly improves upon the strongest convergence
guarantees previously achieved by human-designed algorithms and establishes the optimal complexity for
decentralized stochastic strongly convex optimization, up to logarithmic factors.

Case 5: Decentralized Retraction-Free Optimization on the Stiefel Manifold. The fifth paper, [24], develops a
decentralized retraction-free method for optimization over the Stiefel manifold by integrating an approximate
gradient mapping with an EXTRA-type primal-dual recursion. Under the coordination of the MetaAgent,
the resulting algorithm, RF-EXTRA, avoids computationally expensive retraction operations while retaining
the simple peer-to-peer communication structure of EXTRA. A central technical challenge is to control the
violation of the orthogonality constraint while performing primal-dual-type updates directly in the ambient
Euclidean space for the nonconvex manifold constrained optimization problem. The theoretical analysis
establishes an O(1/K) convergence rate with a constant stepsize. The proof develops a joint-error contraction
inequality that simultaneously controls network disagreement, tracking error, and constraint violation, together
with a careful descent analysis of the original objective function. Experiments on decentralized principal
component analysis and low-rank matrix completion demonstrate that RF-EXTRA compares favorably with
existing decentralized baselines and achieves strong communication efficiency across the tested Stiefel-manifold
optimization tasks. To the best of our knowledge, [24] is the first decentralized retraction-free primal-dual-type
method for optimization over the Stiefel manifold and achieves the state-of-the-art O(1/K) convergence rate
under standard assumptions and a constant stepsize without communicating gradients or their compressions.
These five case studies collectively demonstrate ReasFlow’s ability to produce research outputs of publishable
quality across diverse applied mathematics domains, varying levels of technical difficulty, and different modes
of human interaction. The first three cases highlight the system’s effectiveness under direct prompting, where
it addressed challenges including tight variance analysis under stochastic independence, the integration of
subspace projection with heterogeneity correction, and the noncommutativity between the msgn operator and
gossip averaging. The final two cases demonstrate the scalability and robustness of the MetaAgent, which
autonomously coordinated specialized sub-agents to solve complex problems involving optimal multi-gossip
acceleration and retraction-free optimization over constrained manifolds. Collectively, these results show that
ReasFlow’s knowledge-augmented architecture can generate rigorous theoretical advances and comprehensive
empirical validation across federated learning, decentralized signal processing, manifold optimization, and
LLM training.

5.2   Performance Evaluation on Automatic Full-Paper Generation
To evaluate ReasFlow’s proficiency in autonomous end-to-end manuscript generation, we conducted a controlled
experiment on the automated production of [16]. All baseline systems were provided with an identical initial
prompt, comprising the core research idea and a set of seminal references (see Appendix B), and evaluated
after a single autonomous trial without human intervention. In our framework, the MetaAgent (powered by
                                                                                                                23


Table 2 Per-backbone evaluation of the SurveyAgent vs. the base LLM. Each score is the total (Content Accuracy +
Citation Relevance, out of 20) averaged across three evaluation models.

                          Task    Backbone                 Base    ReasFlow      Adv.
                                  DeepSeek-v3.2            12.65     17.93       +5.27
                                  GPT-5.1                  19.20     17.78       −1.41
                          [16]    GPT-5.4                  9.08      16.75       +7.67
                                  Claude Sonnet 4.6        11.07     17.24       +6.17
                                  Average                  13.00     17.42       +4.42
                                  DeepSeek-v3.2            13.28     14.03       +0.75
                                  GPT-5.1                  14.52     16.63       +2.11
                          [64]    GPT-5.4                  13.23     16.15       +2.92
                                  Claude Sonnet 4.6        14.03     14.90       +0.88
                                  Average                  13.77     15.43       +1.66
                                  DeepSeek-v3.2             8.14     18.36      +10.23
                                  GPT-5.1                  7.00      16.03      +9.03
                          [59]    GPT-5.4                  12.50     13.67      +1.17
                                  Claude Sonnet 4.6        17.32     11.62      −5.70
                                  Average                  11.24     14.92       +3.68
                          Overall Average                  12.67     15.92       +3.26



GPT-5.4) orchestrated the entire multi-agent pipeline.
We benchmark ReasFlow against several publicly available autonomous research systems: (i) proprietary web-
based reasoning systems ChatGPT (GPT-5.3), ChatGPT Pro (GPT-5.4-Pro), Gemini (Gemini-3.1-Pro), and
Claude Pro (Claude Opus 4.6); (ii) DeepScientist [50] (GPT-5.4); (iii) CycleResearcher [49] (CycleResearcher
-ML-12B); (iv) AI-Scientist-v2 [54] (GPT-5.4); and (v) ARIS [56] (GPT-5.4).
To ensure impartial assessment, we developed a PaperReviewAgent that evaluates generated manuscripts
across nine scholarly dimensions: (i) mathematical rigor, (ii) originality and significance, (iii) quality of
numerical experiments, (iv) consistency between theoretical claims and empirical results, (v) writing and
presentation, (vi) citation accuracy, (vii) internal logical consistency, (viii) visual and formatting quality, and
(ix) AI and ethics compliance. Detailed scoring criteria and evaluation prompts are provided in Appendix B.
As shown in Table 1, ReasFlow achieves an average score of 77.9, outperforming the strongest baseline
(DeepScientist, 57.3) by over 20 points. Notably, ReasFlow maintains robust performance across all three
reviewer backends, indicating that its advantage is not an artifact of evaluator bias. The performance gap is
particularly pronounced in dimensions requiring deep reasoning, mathematical rigor and theory-experiment
consistency, which we analyze further in Sec. 5.3.3.

5.3     Performance Evaluation on Section-Level Generation
To isolate the contributions of individual components, we evaluate ReasFlow’s specialized agents on their
respective subtasks. We focus particularly on the ProverAgent, which addresses the most challenging reasoning
bottleneck.

5.3.1   Performance Evaluation for the Survey Agent
We evaluate the SurveyAgent by comparing the Related Work section it generates against that produced by
the base LLM across three survey tasks ([16], [64], and [59]). Each task is generated with four LLM backbones
(DeepSeek, GPT-5.1, GPT-5.4, and Claude Sonnet 4.6) and independently scored by three evaluation models
(GPT-5.1, Sonnet 4.6, and DeepSeek) for robustness. The evaluation assesses two dimensions on a 1-10
                                                                                                                24


               Table 3 Algorithm script first-run success rate. Bold: best; underlined: second best.

                     System                          Successful Tasks     First-Run Success
                     ReasFlow (GPT-5.4)                      35                  100%
                     ReasFlow (GPT-5.1)                      35                  94%
                     Codex-CLI (GPT-5.4)                     35                  97%
                     Claude Code (Sonnet 4.6)                35                  71%
                     AI Scientist-v2 (Default)               35                  60%
                     ARIS (Sonnet 4.6)                       35                  44%


scale: (i) Content Accuracy, which verifies whether cited papers are correctly described by cross-referencing a
339-paper FAISS vector database; and (ii) Citation Relevance, which measures whether the selected references
align with the survey plan. Full evaluation details, including the rubric and per-evaluator breakdowns, are
provided in Appendix B.2.
Table 2 reports the per-backbone results. The SurveyAgent achieves an overall advantage of +3.26 points,
with the largest gain of +10.23 observed for DeepSeek on [59]. The improvement is predominantly driven
by Content Accuracy (+2.92 on average), as the agent’s citations are retrieved from a verified paper library
rather than relying on parametric knowledge. Across all 36 paired comparisons (4 backbones × 3 tasks × 3
evaluation models), the SurveyAgent wins in 28 cases (77.8% win rate).

5.3.2   Performance Evaluation for the Algorithm Agent
Following MLR-Bench [7], we introduce OR-Bench, a benchmark designed to evaluate AI agents’ algorithmic
design and experiment implementation capabilities, with a focus on open-ended optimization research.
We compare the AlgorithmAgent (using GPT-5.1 and GPT-5.4) against ARIS (Claude Opus 4.6), Codex
(GPT-5.4), Claude Code (Claude Opus 4.6), and AI Scientist-v2 (default with Claude Opus 4.6 for coding,
GPT-4o-20241120 for writing) across 35 tasks (20 from MLR-Bench and 15 from OR-Bench). Given the same
initial prompt, each agent is required to correctly design and implement the target algorithm within 3,600
seconds. As reported in Table 3, ReasFlow with GPT-5.4 achieves a leading first-run success rate of 98%,
compared with 38%–95% for the baselines, demonstrating the robustness of ReasFlow’s AlgorithmAgent.

5.3.3   Performance Evaluation for the Prover Agent
We assess the ProverAgent by evaluating its ability to generate a complete convergence analysis for a given
algorithm. The algorithm proposed in [64] is selected as the target, ensuring that no prior theoretical results are
publicly available; therefore, all systems must derive the theory independently. Both ReasFlow’s ProverAgent
and baseline agents are provided with the same initial prompt and allowed only a single trial, with no iterative
refinement or additional hints.
We compare against the following baselines: (i) general-purpose conversational agents accessible via official
web interfaces (ChatGPT and Gemini); (ii) ReasLingo, a publicly available agent on the ReasLab platfom built
on the Gemini CLI; (iii) ProofGrader [32], an open-source AI system designed for automated mathematical
proving; and (iv) QED [2], a multi-agent pipeline for generating rigorous natural-language proofs for given
mathematical problems. All agents in ReasFlow operate with a medium reasoning level to reduce computational
overhead.
To evaluate the generated reports, we developed a ProofReviewAgent that scores each report across five
dimensions: (i) academic formalism and formatting (10 points), (ii) target alignment and relevance (10 points),
(iii) consistency of assumptions and notation (10 points), (iv) logical deduction and correctness (50 points),
and (v) theoretical significance and strength (20 points). The complete evaluation prompt is provided in
Appendix B.
As reported in Table 4, ReasFlow with GPT-5.4 achieves the highest average score of 90.7, compared to 73 for
the best-performing baseline (QED with GPT-5.4). Notably, when evaluated by Gemini-3-Pro, ReasFlow
                                                                                                                              25


Table 4 Scores of the theoretical reports reviewed by the ProofReviewAgent. We use GPT-5.1, GPT-5.4, and
Gemini-3-Pro as the reviewers’ LLM backend, respectively. Bold: best; underlined: second best.

        AI Agent                        Reasoning Effort       GPT-5.1       GPT-5.4        Gemini-3-Pro         Average
        ChatGPT (GPT-5.3)                   Default                  29             15              7              17
        Gemini (Gemini-3.1-Pro)             Default                  81             24             48              51
        ReasLingo (Gemini-3-Pro)             High                    91             48             40             59.7
        ReasLingo (GPT-5.1)                  High                    87             35             40             54.0
        ReasLingo (GPT-5.4)                  High                    92             57             60             69.7
        ProofGrader (GPT-5.1)                High                    92             34             70             65.3
        ProofGrader (GPT-5.4)                High                    93             39             75              69
        QED (GPT-5.4)                        High                    98             51             70              73
        ReasFlow (Gemini-3-Pro)             Medium                   91             62             100            84.3
        ReasFlow (GPT-5.1)                  Medium                   93             45             100            79.3
        ReasFlow (GPT-5.4)                  Medium                   94             78             100            90.7

Table 5 Experiment Execution scores (1–10) on Soundness (Sdn.), Consistency (Cst.), Completeness (Cpl.), Novelty
(Nvl.), Insightfulness (Isf.), Significance (Sgn.), Design Soundness (D.S.), Design Completeness (D.C.), Algorithm–
Experiment Alignment (AEA.), Experimental Effectiveness (E.E.), Writeup Readability (W.R.), and Hallucination
Suspicion (H.S.). Scores are averaged over n successfully completed tasks. Bold: best; underline: second best.

 System                            n     Sdn.   Cst.   Cpl.   Nvl.    Isf.   Sgn.    D.S.   D.C.   AEA.   E.E.    W.R.     H.S.
 ReasFlow (GPT-5.4)                35    8.49   8.23   7.97   6.42    7.85   4.99    7.99   8.00   8.95   8.07    8.17     9%
 ReasFlow (GPT-5.1)                35    7.34   6.87   6.18   5.29    6.41   3.48    6.91   6.60   7.53   6.11    6.83     39%
 ARIS (Claude Sonnet 4.6)          35    5.32   5.21   4.77   5.51    4.93   3.35    6.23   5.70   6.84   5.04    4.59     46%
 Codex (GPT-5.4)                   35    6.50   6.55   6.17   4.81    5.95   3.44    6.01   5.91   6.61   5.83    5.65     26%
 Claude Code (Claude Sonnet 4.6)   35    5.91   5.68   5.53   4.98    5.42   3.40    5.86   5.72   6.50   5.40    5.11     43%
 AI Scientist-v2 (Default)         35    1.28   3.07   1.72   5.64    4.94   2.35    6.39   6.14   7.09   3.16    3.84     100%



attains a perfect score of 100 across all three LLM backbones. Detailed dimension-wise scores are provided in
Table 19 (Appendix B). These results confirm that the knowledge augmentation pipeline (Sec. 3.2) effectively
instills domain-specific proof discipline into the LLM, enabling it to handle complex reasoning tasks that
baselines fail to address.

5.3.4     Performance Evaluation for the Experiment Agent
To evaluate the ExperimentAgent, we adopt an experimental setup similar to that in Sec. 5.3.2. Specifically,
each agent is given its own outputs from the algorithm design phase (Sec. 5.3.2) and must drive real experiments
to completion within a time limit of 7,200 seconds. We evaluate performance using GPT-5.4 and Claude
Sonnet 4.6 as judges, based on the task description, the execution artifacts, and the resulting reports.
Beyond the six evaluation dimensions inherited from MLR-Bench (Soundness, Consistency, Completeness,
Novelty, Insightfulness, and Significance), we introduce five additional metrics: (i) Design Soundness, which
measures the quality of the experimental setup including baselines, evaluation metrics, ablation studies, and
internal logic; (ii) Design Completeness, which assesses whether all necessary components of the experiment
are included in the plan; (iii) Algorithm–Experiment Alignment, which evaluates how well the experimental
design exploits the algorithm’s core contributions; (iv) Experimental Effectiveness, which examines whether
the results convincingly support the algorithm’s claims; and (v) Writeup Readability, which captures whether
the report provides the information necessary for downstream paper writing. All dimensions are scored on a
1–10 scale and averaged across the two judges. We additionally evaluate Hallucination Suspicion: a task is
flagged if either judge finds that the agent’s workspace lacks result files or contains only trivial or synthetic
outputs, indicating insufficient evidence of genuine execution. As shown in Table 5, ReasFlow outperforms
the baselines in many aspects, particularly on metrics related to experimental design and writeup readability,
while also incurring the lowest hallucination suspicion, thereby demonstrating robustness and efficiency.
                                                                                                               26


5.3.5   Performance Evaluation for the Introduction Agent
We evaluate the IntroductionAgent by comparing the Introduction section it generates against that produced
by the base model (GPT-4o) across the three papers. For each configuration, five independent runs are
performed and results are averaged. Three independent evaluation models (GPT-5.4, Claude Opus 4.6,
and Gemini-3.1-Pro-Preview) assess each output along three axes: (i) Content Coverage, measuring how
comprehensively the introduction captures the paper’s key results; (ii) Faithfulness, quantifying hallucination
avoidance as 1 − (#unsupported claims/#total claims); and (iii) Content Quality, a rubric-based score
assessing six dimensions including domain emphasis, algorithm detail, and experimental depth. Two composite
scores, Overall Balanced (OB) and Overall Technical Focus (OTF), are computed as weighted combinations;
the latter up-weights content quality and core scientific coverage. Table 6 summarizes per-evaluator results
for these two composites; axis-wise scores and additional detail are in Appendix B.6.

Table 6 Per-evaluator results of the IntroductionAgent (RF) vs. the base model on two composite metrics. Each cell
is the mean over 5 independent runs.

                                                Overall Balanced (OB)       Overall Tech. Focus (OTF)
        Paper    Evaluator
                                                Base      RF       Adv.     Base      RF        Adv.
                 GPT-5.4                        0.554    0.683   +23.2%     0.520   0.661      +27.0%
                 Opus 4.6                       0.510    0.739   +45.0%     0.461   0.708      +53.6%
        [16]
                 Gemini-3.1-Pro-Preview         0.677    0.795   +17.3%     0.658   0.788      +19.8%
                 Average                        0.580    0.739   +27.3%     0.547   0.719      +31.6%
                 GPT-5.4                        0.552    0.642   +16.4%     0.509   0.603      +18.3%
                 Opus 4.6                       0.527    0.642   +21.6%     0.474   0.602      +27.0%
        [64]
                 Gemini-3.1-Pro-Preview         0.656    0.705   +7.6%      0.629   0.672      +6.7%
                 Average                        0.578    0.663   +14.7%     0.538   0.625      +16.3%
                 GPT-5.4                        0.465    0.648   +39.5%     0.418   0.622      +48.8%
                 Opus 4.6                       0.482    0.657   +36.2%     0.432   0.629      +45.5%
        [59]
                 Gemini-3.1-Pro-Preview         0.587    0.734   +24.9%     0.548   0.719      +31.3%
                 Average                        0.511    0.679   +32.9%     0.466   0.657      +40.9%
        Overall Average                         0.557    0.694   +24.6%     0.517   0.667      +29.1%


As shown in Table 6, the IntroductionAgent consistently outperforms the base model across all evaluators
and papers, with an overall average gain of +24.6% on OB and +29.1% on OTF. At the axis level (detailed
in Appendix B.6), the most substantial improvement is in Content Quality (+52.3% on average), with a
peak of +121.4% on [59] under the Opus 4.6 evaluator, indicating that the agent produces introductions
with significantly richer technical depth. Improvements are most pronounced on [59], where the base model
struggles most, suggesting that the IntroductionAgent scales better on harder tasks.

5.3.6   Performance Evaluation for the Writing Agent
We evaluate the WritingAgent on the task of assembling the complete [16] asset bundle (proved theorems,
algorithm pseudocode, experiment report with raw numerical data and pre-generated figures, introduction and
related-work drafts, and reference .bib files) into a compilable CSIAM-AM manuscript. All compared systems
receive exactly the same input bundle, the same task prompt (the shared PROMPT.md of Appendix B.7), and
the same CSIAM-AM template; only interface-level adapters differ.
Eleven systems are compared: our WritingAgent run with a GPT-5.1 backend, and ten baselines obtained by
pairing two general-purpose coding agents (Claude Code and Codex ) with two skill configurations (vanilla
and the scientific-writing skill pack ARIS [56]) across two model backends (GPT-5.1 and GPT-5.4), plus the
scientific-writing system ReasLingo with GPT-5.1 and GPT-5.4.
                                                                                                               27


Each generated manuscript is scored along four dimensions: (I) Faithfulness, whether every statement in
the paper can be traced back to the assets without fabrication or distortion; (II) Coverage, whether the
core theorems, algorithms, experiments, figures, and references are actually incorporated; (III) Writing
Quality, whether the prose is clear, coherent, well-argued, and uses evidence properly; and (IV) Submittability,
whether the paper compiles cleanly, presents an acceptable visual layout, and obeys the template. Each
dimension is decomposed into sub-dimensions (5/5/4/3) that are scored independently on a 0–10 scale by three
reviewer models (GPT-5.1, GPT-5.4, Gemini-3-Pro), with Phase IV additionally using a vision describer plus
programmatic compile and template checks. Sub-dimension scores are averaged with equal weights within a
dimension, across the three reviewers, and finally across the four dimensions, giving the overall equal-weight
score reported below. Complete per-phase scoring rules, prompts, and sub-dimension tables are provided in
Appendix B.7.

Table 7 Evaluation of the manuscripts produced by the WritingAgent and ten baselines on [16]. Columns I–IV are
the per-dimension scores (each the mean across its sub-dimensions and across three reviewer models); Avg. is the
equal-weight mean of the four dimensions. Bold: best; underlined: second best.

         System (Executor, Skills, Model)         I. Faith.   II. Cov.   III. Write.   IV. Subm.   Avg.
         Claude Code + ARIS (GPT-5.1)               7.67       6.33         5.42         2.00       5.36
         Codex, vanilla (GPT-5.4)                   6.47       5.33         4.58         6.71       5.77
         Codex + ARIS (GPT-5.4)                     8.47       4.33         5.58         7.24       6.41
         ReasLingo (GPT-5.4)                        8.47       4.80         5.08         7.87       6.56
         Claude Code, vanilla (GPT-5.1)             7.87       7.20         7.17         4.62       6.72
         Codex, vanilla (GPT-5.1)                   7.67       5.67         7.33         7.82       7.12
         ReasLingo (GPT-5.1)                        8.47       7.60         6.25         8.84       7.79
         Claude Code + ARIS (GPT-5.4)               9.07       8.13         7.33         7.56       8.02
         Codex + ARIS (GPT-5.1)                     7.60       8.07         7.75         8.89       8.08
         Claude Code, vanilla (GPT-5.4)             8.20       9.13         7.67         10.00      8.75
         ReasFlow WritingAgent (GPT-5.1)            9.73        9.47        8.16         9.87       9.31


As shown in Table 7, the ReasFlow WritingAgent attains the highest overall score of 9.31, leading the next
best system by 0.56 absolute points and the median baseline by over 2.2 points. It is the only system that
ranks first on three of the four dimensions simultaneously (I-Faithfulness, II-Coverage, III-Writing Quality); on
IV-Submittability it is runner-up (9.87), losing only by a 0.13 margin to a short 11-page baseline that delivers a
visually clean PDF but trails on content-level dimensions (II-Coverage and III-Writing Quality). The ranking
differs substantially between dimensions, confirming that the four axes measure genuinely different aspects of
manuscript assembly rather than a single latent quality; for instance, ReasLingo (GPT-5.4) places third on
I-Faithfulness but collapses to tenth on II-Coverage because its manuscript omits most of the core algorithm
and experiment sections, while the Codex family excels on I2-Algorithm Fidelity but loses on II-Coverage and
IV-Submittability due to missing experimental integration and heavy compile-time overflows. These patterns
suggest that assembling a publication-ready manuscript from heterogeneous research artifacts is not a narrow
prompt-engineering task but requires coordinated planning, selection, polishing, and typesetting, which aligns
with the two-tier design (Coordinator plus parallel SubWriters) of the ReasFlow WritingAgent.

6   Conclusion and Future Work
In this work, we introduced ReasFlow, an end-to-end autonomous multi-agent system for reasoning-centric
scientific discovery in applied mathematics. ReasFlow addresses the distinctive challenges of theory-oriented
research, including open-ended problem formulation, rigorous proof construction, and the effective use of
implicit domain knowledge. It implements a collaborative paradigm in which the human researcher serves as
the principal investigator, while the system carries out the labor-intensive stages of the research pipeline. Its
effectiveness is driven by two complementary mechanisms: an internal verification loop that audits theoretical
derivations and identifies critical errors before human inspection, and an automated knowledge-retrieval
pipeline that proactively extracts domain insights and procedural heuristics into lightweight knowledge cards.
                                                                                                                     28


Together, these mechanisms enable ReasFlow, through internal knowledge augmentation, to achieve reasoning
performance comparable to that obtained with direct expert guidance.
Our evaluation comprises five case studies spanning federated learning, decentralized signal processing, manifold
optimization, and LLM optimizers. Across these diverse applied mathematics settings, ReasFlow produced
novel algorithms with rigorous convergence guarantees, strong empirical performance, and complete research
manuscripts. Comparative evaluations show that ReasFlow consistently outperforms state-of-the-art publicly
accessible AI research systems under carefully designed LLM-based review rubrics, while component-level
analyses confirm the substantial contribution of knowledge augmentation. These findings establish ReasFlow
as a practical and scalable framework for automating theory-driven research in applied mathematics.
Despite these promising results, several limitations remain. The current implementation of ReasFlow relies
heavily on a built-in knowledge base tailored primarily to applied math and related areas. Extending the
system to a broader range of theory-intensive disciplines will require automated knowledge-extraction pipelines
capable of identifying and organizing domain-specific concepts, implicit insights, and methodological heuristics
across disciplinary boundaries. Moreover, although the internal verification loop detects many common
reasoning errors, it does not guarantee formal correctness. Integrating ReasFlow with interactive theorem
provers and formal verification systems such as Lean, Coq, or Isabelle could provide stronger guarantees
for critical theoretical claims. Finally, the system’s capabilities remain constrained by the reasoning ability
of its underlying large language models. As foundation models continue to advance, ReasFlow’s modular,
knowledge-augmented architecture can provide a robust foundation for increasingly autonomous and ambitious
scientific discovery.
ReasFlow is publicly available via its GitHub repository and the ReasLab platform, which provides a
collaborative workspace for researchers to pursue theoretical innovation with AI assistance. By bridging the
gap between general-purpose language models and the specialized demands of reasoning-centric discovery, we
hope that ReasFlow will accelerate theoretical research in applied mathematics and enable scientists to explore
ideas that were previously constrained by the substantial effort required for rigorous derivation, experimental
validation, and manuscript preparation.

References
 [1] Abouzaid, M., Blumberg, A. J., Hairer, M., Kileel, J., Kolda, T. G., Nelson, P. D., Spielman, D., Srivastava, N.,
     Ward, R., Weinberger, S., et al. First proof. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.05192, 2026.
 [2] An, C., Ye, Q., Pan, M., and Zhang, J. Qed: An open-source multi-agent system for generating mathematical
     proofs on open problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.24021, 2026.
 [3] Asai, A., He, J., Shao, R., Shi, W., Singh, A., Chang, J. C., Lo, K., Soldaini, L., Feldman, S., D’arcy, M., et al.
     Openscholar: Synthesizing scientific literature with retrieval-augmented LMs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.14199,
     2024.
 [4] Berthier, R., Bach, F., and Gaillard, P. Accelerated gossip in networks of given dimension using jacobi polynomial
     iterations. SIAM Journal on Mathematics of Data Science, 2(1):24–47, 2020. doi: 10.1137/19M1244822.
 [5] Bubeck, S., Coester, C., Eldan, R., Gowers, T., Lee, Y. T., Lupsasca, A., Sawhney, M., Scherrer, R., Sellke, M.,
     Spears, B. K., et al. Early science acceleration experiments with GPT-5. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.16072, 2025.
 [6] Chai, J., Tang, S., Ye, R., Du, Y., Zhu, X., Zhou, M., Wang, Y., Zhang, Y., Zhang, L., Chen, S., et al. Scimaster:
     Towards general-purpose scientific AI agents, part i. x-master as foundation: Can we lead on humanity’s last
     exam? arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.05241, 2025.
 [7] Chen, H., Xiong, M., Lu, Y., Han, W., Deng, A., He, Y., Wu, J., Li, Y., Liu, Y., and Hooi, B. Mlr-bench:
     Evaluating ai agents on open-ended machine learning research. Advances in Neural Information Processing
     Systems, 38, 2026.
 [8] Chen, J., Chen, W., Du, J., Hu, J., Jiang, Z., Jie, A., Jin, X., Jin, X., Li, C., Shi, W., et al. Seed-prover 1.5:
     Mastering undergraduate-level theorem proving via learning from experience. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.17260,
     2025.
                                                                                                                      29


 [9] Chen, L., Gu, J., Huang, L., Huang, W., Jiang, Z., Jie, A., Jin, X., Jin, X., Li, C., Ma, K., et al. Seed-prover:
     Deep and broad reasoning for automated theorem proving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.23726, 2025.
[10] Chu, Z., Ai, Q., Tu, Y., Li, H., and Liu, Y. Pre: A peer review based large language model evaluator. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2401.15641, 2024.
[11] Feng, T., Trinh, T. H., Bingham, G., Hwang, D., Chervonyi, Y., Jung, J., Lee, J., Pagano, C., Kim, S.-h.,
     Pasqualotto, F., et al. Towards autonomous mathematics research. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.10177, 2026.
[12] Gao, X., Ruan, J., Zhang, Z., Gao, J., Liu, T., and Fu, Y. Reviewagents: Bridging the gap between human and
     AI-generated paper reviews. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.08506, 2025.
[13] Gottweis, J., Weng, W.-H., Daryin, A., Tu, T., Palepu, A., Sirkovic, P., Myaskovsky, A., Weissenberger, F., Rong,
     K., Tanno, R., et al. Towards an AI co-scientist. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.18864, 2025.
[14] He, C., Ren, S., Mao, J., and Larsson, E. G. Demuon: A decentralized muon for matrix optimization over graphs.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.01377, 2025.
[15] He, Y., Li, P., Hu, Y., Chen, C., and Yuan, K. Subspace optimization for large language models with convergence
     guarantees. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 22468–22522. PMLR, 2025.
[16] He, Y., Huang, Z., and Geng, J. Fedslop: Memory-efficient federated learning with low-rank gradient projection.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.24012, 2026. The unpolished ReasFlow-generated manuscript, prior to human-expert
     polishing, is available at https://blog.reaslab.io/papers/[blog]FedSLoP.pdf.
[17] Huang, Y. and Yang, L. F. Winning gold at IMO 2025 with a model-agnostic verification-and-refinement pipeline.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.15855, 2025.
[18] Hubert, T., Mehta, R., Sartran, L., Horváth, M. Z., Žužić, G., Wieser, E., Huang, A., Schrittwieser, J., Schroecker,
     Y., Masoom, H., et al. Olympiad-level formal mathematical reasoning with reinforcement learning. Nature, pp.
     1–3, 2025.
[19] Idahl, M. and Ahmadi, Z. Openreviewer: A specialized large language model for generating critical scientific
     paper reviews. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association
     for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (System Demonstrations), pp. 550–562, 2025.
[20] Jakovetić, D., Xavier, J., and Moura, J. M. F. Fast distributed gradient methods. IEEE Transactions on Automatic
     Control, 59(5):1131–1146, 2014. doi: 10.1109/TAC.2014.2298712.
[21] Ju, H., Chen, L., Wu, P., Dai, B., and Dong, B. Matlas: A semantic search engine for mathematics. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2604.17484, 2026.
[22] Ju, H., Gao, G., Jiang, J., Wu, B., Sun, Z., Chen, L., Wang, Y., Wang, Y., Wang, Z., He, W., et al. Automated
     conjecture resolution with formal verification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.03789, 2026.
[23] Li, C., Lai, Z., An, D., Hu, J., and Wen, Z. Advancing mathematical research via human-AI interactive theorem
     proving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.09443, 2025.
[24] Li, S. and Hu, J. A retraction-free extra method for decentralized optimization on the stiefel manifold. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2604.23754, 2026. The unpolished ReasFlow-generated manuscript, prior to human-expert polishing,
     is available at https://blog.reaslab.io/papers/[blog]Retractionfree-EXTRA.pdf.
[25] Li, S., Xu, C., Wang, J., Gong, X., Chen, C., Zhang, J., Wang, J., Lam, K.-Y., and Ji, S. Llms cannot reliably
     judge (yet?): A comprehensive assessment on the robustness of LLM-as-a-judge. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.09443,
     2025.
[26] Li, X., Wu, R., Liu, X., Wang, X., Hu, J., Bai, Z., Zeng, B., Liang, H., Chen, L., Chen, M., et al. Sciagent: A
     unified multi-agent system for generalistic scientific reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.08151, 2025.
[27] Lin, Y., Tang, S., Lyu, B., Wu, J., Lin, H., Yang, K., Li, J., Xia, M., Chen, D., Arora, S., et al. Goedel-prover: A
     frontier model for open-source automated theorem proving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.07640, 2025.
[28] Lin, Y., Tang, S., Lyu, B., Yang, Z., Chung, J.-H., Zhao, H., Jiang, L., Geng, Y., Ge, J., Sun, J., et al. Goedel-
     prover-v2: Scaling formal theorem proving with scaffolded data synthesis and self-correction. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2508.03613, 2025.
                                                                                                                          30


[29] Liu, Z., Cai, Y., Zhu, X., Zheng, Y., Chen, R., Wen, Y., Wang, Y., Chen, S., et al. Ml-master: Towards AI-for-AI
     via integration of exploration and reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.16499, 2025.
[30] Lou, R., Xu, H., Wang, S., Du, J., Kamoi, R., Lu, X., Xie, J., Sun, Y., Zhang, Y., Ahn, J. J., et al. Aaar-1.0:
     Assessing AI’s potential to assist research. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.22394, 2024.
[31] Lu, C., Lu, C., Lange, R. T., Foerster, J., Clune, J., and Ha, D. The AI scientist: Towards fully automated
     open-ended scientific discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.06292, 2024.
[32] Ma, W., Cojocaru, A., Kolhe, N., Louie, B., Sharif, R. S., Zhang, H., Zhuang, V., Zaharia, M., and Min, S.
     Reliable fine-grained evaluation of natural language math proofs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.13888, 2025.
[33] Miao, T., Dai, J., Liu, J., Tan, J., Zhang, M., Jin, W., Du, Y., Jin, T., Pang, X., Liu, Z., et al. Physmaster: Building
     an autonomous AI physicist for theoretical and computational physics research. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.19799,
     2025.
[34] Novikov, A., Vũ, N., Eisenberger, M., Dupont, E., Huang, P.-S., Wagner, A. Z., Shirobokov, S., Kozlovskii, B.,
     Ruiz, F. J., Mehrabian, A., et al. Alphaevolve: A coding agent for scientific and algorithmic discovery. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2506.13131, 2025.
[35] Phan, L., Gatti, A., Han, Z., Li, N., Hu, J., Zhang, H., Zhang, C. B. C., Shaaban, M., Ling, J., Shi, S., et al.
     Humanity’s last exam. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.14249, 2025.
[36] Qiu, J., Shi, J., Juan, X., Zhao, Z., Geng, J., Liu, S., Wang, H., Wu, S., and Wang, M. Physics supernova: AI
     agent matches elite gold medalists at IPHO 2025. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.01659, 2025.
[37] Ren, Z., Shao, Z., Song, J., Xin, H., Wang, H., Zhao, W., Zhang, L., Fu, Z., Zhu, Q., Yang, D., et al. Deepseek-
     prover-v2: Advancing formal mathematical reasoning via reinforcement learning for subgoal decomposition. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2504.21801, 2025.
[38] Romera-Paredes, B., Barekatain, M., Novikov, A., Balog, M., Kumar, M. P., Dupont, E., Ruiz, F. J., Ellenberg,
     J. S., Wang, P., Fawzi, O., et al. Mathematical discoveries from program search with large language models.
     Nature, 625(7995):468–475, 2024.
[39] Scaman, K., Bach, F., Bubeck, S., Lee, Y. T., and Massoulié, L. Optimal algorithms for smooth and strongly
     convex distributed optimization in networks. Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine
     Learning, 80:3027–3036, 2018.
[40] Schmidgall, S., Su, Y., Wang, Z., Sun, X., Wu, J., Yu, X., Liu, J., Moor, M., Liu, Z., and Barsoum, E. Agent
     laboratory: Using LLM agents as research assistants. Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
     EMNLP 2025, pp. 5977–6043, 2025.
[41] Skarlinski, M. D., Cox, S., Laurent, J. M., Braza, J. D., Hinks, M., Hammerling, M. J., Ponnapati, M., Rodriques,
     S. G., and White, A. D. Language agents achieve superhuman synthesis of scientific knowledge. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2409.13740, 2024.
[42] Sun, M. and Yuan, K. Accelerated decentralized stochastic gradient descent for strongly convex optimization.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.07496, 2026. The unpolished ReasFlow-generated manuscript, prior to human-expert
     polishing, is available at https://blog.reaslab.io/papers/[blog]MC-ADSGD.pdf.
[43] Trinh, T. H., Wu, Y., Le, Q. V., He, H., and Luong, T. Solving olympiad geometry without human demonstrations.
     Nature, 625(7995):476–482, 2024.
[44] Tsoukalas, G., Lee, J., Jennings, J., Xin, J., Ding, M., Jennings, M., Thakur, A., and Chaudhuri, S. Putnambench:
     Evaluating neural theorem-provers on the putnam mathematical competition. Advances in Neural Information
     Processing Systems, 37:11545–11569, 2024.
[45] Wang, H., Unsal, M., Lin, X., Baksys, M., Liu, J., Santos, M. D., Sung, F., Vinyes, M., Ying, Z., Zhu, Z., et al.
     Kimina-prover preview: Towards large formal reasoning models with reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2504.11354, 2025.
[46] Wang, J., Zhang, J., Guo, Q., Guo, L., Li, R., Zhang, C., Peng, C., Wang, C., Zhao, D., Shi, J., et al. Longcat-
     flash-prover: Advancing native formal reasoning via agentic tool-integrated reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2603.21065, 2026.
                                                                                                                     31


[47] Wang, Y., Guo, Q., Yao, W., Zhang, H., Zhang, X., Wu, Z., Zhang, M., Dai, X., Zhang, M., Wen, Q., et al.
     Autosurvey: Large language models can automatically write surveys. Advances in neural information processing
     systems, 37:115119–115145, 2024.
[48] Wang, Z., Ma, W., Ming, Z., Zhang, G., Yuan, K., and Wen, Z. M2f: Automated formalization of mathematical
     literature at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.17016, 2026.
[49] Weng, Y., Zhu, M., Bao, G., Zhang, H., Wang, J., Zhang, Y., and Yang, L. Cycleresearcher: Improving automated
     research via automated review. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.00816, 2024.
[50] Weng, Y., Zhu, M., Xie, Q., Sun, Q., Lin, Z., Liu, S., and Zhang, Y. Deepscientist: Advancing frontier-pushing
     scientific findings progressively. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.26603, 2025.
[51] Xin, R., Xi, C., Yang, J., Chen, F., Wu, H., Xiao, X., Sun, Y., Zheng, S., and Ding, M. Bfs-prover: Scalable
     best-first tree search for llm-based automatic theorem proving. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the
     Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 32588–32599, 2025.
[52] Xin, R., Zheng, Z., Nie, Y., Yuan, K., and Xiao, X. Scaling up multi-turn off-policy rl and multi-agent tree search
     for llm step-provers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.06493, 2025.
[53] Xu, T., Qian, Z., Liu, G., Ling, L., Zhang, Z., Wu, B., Zhang, S., Lu, K., Shi, W., Wang, Z., et al. Idea2story:
     An automated pipeline for transforming research concepts into complete scientific narratives. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2601.20833, 2026.
[54] Yamada, Y., Lange, R. T., Lu, C., Hu, S., Lu, C., Foerster, J., Clune, J., and Ha, D. The AI scientist-v2:
     Workshop-level automated scientific discovery via agentic tree search. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.08066, 2025.
[55] Yang, H., Fang, M., and Liu, J. Achieving linear speedup with partial worker participation in non-iid federated
     learning. Proceedings of ICLR, 2021.
[56] Yang, R., Li, Y., and Li, S. Aris: Autonomous research via adversarial multi-agent collaboration. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2605.03042, 2026.
[57] Ye, J., Wang, Y., Huang, Y., Chen, D., Zhang, Q., Moniz, N., Gao, T., Geyer, W., Huang, C., Chen, P.-Y., et al.
     Justice or prejudice? quantifying biases in LLM-as-a-judge. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.02736, 2024.
[58] Ye, R., Pang, X., Chai, J., Chen, J., Yin, Z., Xiang, Z., Dong, X., Shao, J., and Chen, S. Are we there yet?
     revealing the risks of utilizing large language models in scholarly peer review. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.01708,
     2024.
[59] Zhang, H., Kong, B., Geng, J., and Huang, Z. Suda-muon: Structural design principles and boundaries for fully
     decentralized muon. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.23980, 2026. The unpolished ReasFlow-generated manuscript,
     prior to human-expert polishing, is available at https://blog.reaslab.io/papers/[blog]Suda-Muon.pdf.
[60] Zhang, J., Xu, Y., and Yuan, K. An efficient subspace algorithm for federated learning on heterogeneous data.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.05213, 2025.
[61] Zheng, K., Han, J. M., and Polu, S. Minif2f: a cross-system benchmark for formal olympiad-level mathematics.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.00110, 2021.
[62] Zheng, L., Chiang, W.-L., Sheng, Y., Zhuang, S., Wu, Z., Zhuang, Y., Lin, Z., Li, Z., Li, D., Xing, E., et al.
     Judging LLM-as-a-judge with MT-Bench and chatbot arena. Advances in neural information processing systems,
     36:46595–46623, 2023.
[63] Zhu, M., Weng, Y., Yang, L., and Zhang, Y. Deepreview: Improving LLM-based paper review with human-like
     deep thinking process. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
     (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 29330–29355, 2025.
[64] Zhu, S., Huang, Z., Xu, Y., and Li, P. Subspace optimization for efficient federated learning under heterogeneous
     data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.25467, 2026. The unpolished ReasFlow-generated manuscript, prior to human-
     expert polishing, is available at https://blog.reaslab.io/papers/[blog]Subspace-Scaffold.pdf.
                                                                                                           32


A     Detailed Agent Specifications
This appendix catalogs the list of tools of each specialized agent in ReasFlow, as referenced in Sec. 4.

A.1      Survey Agent
Tools:

    1. BasicTools: Read, write, edit files; list directory contents.
    2. OutlineWriterTool: Writes a structured survey outline.
    3. SurveyWriterTool: Queries the built-in paper database and compiles a survey report.
    4. RelatedWorkWriterTool: Drafts the Related Work section with bibtex entries.
    5. LiteratureSearchTool: Searches for papers beyond the internal database (e.g., via Semantic Scholar).
    6. PaperLibrarySearchTool: Searches the built-in FAISS vector database for semantically relevant
       knowledge cards.
    7. LiteratureDetailTools: Retrieves individual paper metadata, citation networks, and reference lists.
    8. ReviewTool: Evaluates the drafted Related Work along four dimensions (format integrity, citation
       relevance, key reference coverage, instruction following) and returns a scored report.
    9. BibtexFormattingSkill: Provides instructions for generating correct bibtex entries.

A.2      Algorithm Agent
Tools:

    1. BasicTools
    2. KnowledgeCardSearch: Searches knowledge cards for relevant algorithmic structures.
    3. LatexWriterAgent: Sub-agent for iterative pseudocode and report generation in LATEX.
    4. TerminalCommandTool: Executes shell commands.
    5. SmartPlotTool: Generates diagnostic figures (e.g., loss curves) from logs.
    6. ImageReaderTool: Verifies visual results via a multimodal LLM.

A.3      Prover Agent
Tools:

    1. BasicTools
    2. RefDownloaderSkill: Instructs the agent on downloading LaTeX source from arXiv.
    3. MathContentSearch: Locates relevant mathematical content across references.
    4. CardGeneratorSkill: Extracts proof techniques and summarizes them into knowledge cards.
    5. KnowledgeSearchTool: Searches for related knowledge cards.
    6. CardRetrieverSkill: Instructs the agent on iterative card retrieval.
    7. LemmaProverSkill: Manages sub-agent sessions for lemma proving.
    8. LemmaProverAgent: Sub-agent that generates lemma proofs.
    9. LemmaVerifierAgent: Sub-agent that checks correctness of drafted proofs.
                                                                                                       33


A.4      Experiment Agent
Tools:

  1. BasicTools
  2. KnowledgeCardSearch: Retrieves dataset/task recommendations and baseline pseudocode.
  3. TerminalCommandTool
  4. AutoTuningTool: Performs automatic hyperparameter optimization.
  5. SmartPlotTool: Generates publication-quality figures.
  6. PlotAnalysisTool: Analyzes figures for clarity and anomalies.
  7. LatexWriterAgent: Assists in composing the final experiment report.

A.5      Introduction Agent
Tools:

  1. BasicTools
  2. ExtractionTools: Tools including ExtractSurveyInfo, ExtractMethodInfo, ExtractExperimentInfo,
     ExtractTheoryInfo, and OrganizeExtractedInfo that generate structured section summaries.
  3. IntroductionWriterTool: Writes the Introduction section in LaTeX with inline hallucination annota-
     tions flagging unsupported claims. Supports three writing styles (ML, Math, Default).
  4. LiteratureSearchTool: A suite of tools including LiteratureGetPaper, LiteratureGetCitations
     and LiteratureGetReferences that retrieve information via Google Scholar and Semantic Scholar.
  5. BibtexFormattingSkill
  6. EvalIntroduction: Evaluates the generated introduction on coverage, faithfulness and context quality.
  7. RefineIntroduction: Performs targeted local refinement based on the evaluation report.

A.6      Writing Agent
The WritingAgent uses a two-tier Coordinator + SubWriter architecture.

Coordinator Tools:

  1. BasicTools
  2. TerminalCommandTool
  3. LatexCompileTool: Compiles the LaTeX project and returns structured logs.
  4. ScreenshotAnalysisTool: Renders PDF pages and inspects them via a vision LLM.
  5. DispatchTools (DispatchTask, wait_for_next): Asynchronously launches SubWriter instances and
     collects their results.
  6. ReviewCompletenessTool: Runs 4 parallel LLM checks (structure, reference verification, visual layout,
     compilation) + asset citation coverage, returns a fix-task list.
  7. ReviewWritingQualityTool: Multi-model parallel writing review + meta-review aggregation with
     venue-aware criteria.
SubWriter Tools:

  1. BasicTools, TerminalCommandTool, LatexCompileTool, ScreenshotAnalysisTool (same as Coordi-
     nator)
                                                                                                                        34


    2. GenerateMethodFigureTool: Multi-agent image pipeline (Retriever → Planner → Stylist → Visualizer
       → Critic) for structural diagrams.

B       Experimental Details
B.1     Experimental Details for Sec. 5.2
B.1.1    Generation Details
In this subsection, we clarify the prompt used to generate the papers for comparison, which is shown in
Fig. 14.
    Prompt for Full Paper Generation

    FedAvg is a classic distributed optimization algorithm in federated learning. Recently, subspace optimization meth-
    ods such as GoLore have sparked a wave of research on memory-efficient large-scale distributed algorithms, which
    reduce memory usage by projecting gradients onto a low-rank subspace, allowing optimizer states (e.g., the first-
    and second-order moments in Adam) to be stored in a low-rank memory-saving version. Consider designing the
    algorithm SFedAvg-GoLore, which introduces the subspace technique from GoLore into FedAvg. It is required to
    consider only local momentum, without global momentum, and to switch the subspace and reset the momentum to
    zero after each communication round. Please conduct academic research and writing focusing on SFedAvg-GoLore.

    References:
    − <https://arxiv.org/abs/2101.11203>: Proof of FedAvg
    − <https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.11289>: Convergence of subspace algorithms


                             Figure 14 Prompt for automatic paper generation in Sec. 5.2.

B.1.2    Evaluation Details
In this subsection, we provide detailed evaluation metrics and results for evaluating the generated papers in
Sec. 5.2. As discussed, we design nine critical scholarly aspects. For each aspect, we design finer dimensions
for assessment. Below we elaborate the detailed prompts for each aspect.
A. Mathematical rigor. For mathematical rigor, we consider five dimensions including: (i) academic formalism
and formatting (10 points), (ii) target alignment and relevance (10 points), (iii) consistency of assumptions
and notation (10 points), (iv) logical deduction and correctness (50 points), and (v) theoretical significance
and strength (20 points). The prompt is as listed in Fig. 15. Corresponding evaluation results are listed in
Table 8.
    System prompt for evaluating Mathematical rigor.

    You are the Mathematical Rigor Reviewer. Evaluate proofs on five dimensions (total 100 pts). Any fatal
    logical gap can invalidate the proof.
    Dimension rubric
    • Dim1 Academic Formalism & Formatting (10): Standard proof structure (Lemma/Theorem/Proof), proper
       LaTeX/math. If wall-of-text with no math or no proof framework, give 0 here and strongly penalize total.
    • Dim2 Target Alignment & Relevance (10): Conclusions, loss functions, and update steps align exactly with the
       stated problem/setting. If irrelevant (e.g., proving SGD when FL requested, assuming convexity in non-convex
       setting), set this to 0 and cap total ≤ 30.
    • Dim3 Consistency of Assumptions & Notation (10): Only provided assumptions used; notation defined and
       consistent. Each undeclared strong assumption deduct 5; undefined/inconsistent symbols deduct 1–3 each.
    • Dim4 Logical Deduction & Correctness (50, core): Line-by-line check.
    • Trivial skips: standard algebra/inequalities → no deduction.
    • Suspicious skips: non-trivial jumps or “it is easy to see/similarly” without steps → deduct 5–10 each; if many,
       Dim4 ≤ 20.
                                                                                                                               35



   • Explicit errors/fake proofs: wrong inequality direction, illegal expectation moves, dimension mismatch,
     fabricated steps → any single one sets Dim4=0 and total ≤ 40.
   • Dim5 Theoretical Significance & Strength (20): Strongest conclusions with weakest assumptions. Reward tight
     rates/general cases; penalize “trivializing” extra assumptions that make the problem easy.
   Scoring rules
   • Use 0–100 mapped by weights above (10/10/10/50/20). Apply caps noted in Dim2/Dim4 explicit errors.
   • Be evidence-based; cite specific formulas/steps from the provided text only.
   Output
   • Return JSON only per the given schema (sub_scores + summary). Do not add fields.


                                 Figure 15 System prompt for evaluating mathematical rigor.

Table 8 Detailed Scores for mathematical rigor. S1, S2, S3 corresponds to evaluations performed with GPT-5.1,
GPT-5.4 and Gemini-3-Pro as the reviewer’s LLM backend, respectively. Full scores for each dimension are 100. The
final score is the weighted average of all dimensions. Bold: best; underlined: second best.

                                    Dim 1 Score    Dim 2 Score    Dim 3 Score     Dim 4 Score    Dim 5 Score     Final Score
  AI Agent
                                   S1   S2   S3    S1   S2   S3   S1   S2   S3    S1   S2   S3   S1   S2   S3   S1    S2    S3
  ChatGPT (GPT-5.3)                70   50   10    90   75   80   82   45   70    60   15    0   65   40   20   67.2 32.5 20
  ChatGPT Pro (GPT-5.4-Pro)        90   88   50    90   82   90   92   76   95    85   28   15   78   45   40   85.3 47.6 39
  Gemini (Gemini-3.1-Pro)          70   35   70    85   70   80   80   35   80    60   10    0   65   35    0   66.5 26   16
  Claude Pro (Claude Opus 4.6)     95   78   95    95   72   95   82   20   95    88   0    90   90   25   90   89.2 22   91.5
  CycleResearcher-ML-12B           50   45   20    70   20   10   30   10    0    20    0    0   40   15    0   33 10.5 3
  DeepScientist (GPT-5.4)          85   86    0    90   88   80   85   78   80    80   42   0    70   22    0   80 50.6 16
  AI Scientist-v2 (GPT-5.4)        60   15    0    85   55   60   75   45   30    40    5    0   60   10    0   54   16    9
  ARIS (GPT-5.4)                   75   85   20    90   82   90   80   78   90    55   35    0   70   55   10   66   53   22
  ReasFlow (GPT-5.4)               92   90   100   90   88   95   88   82   100   85   76   95   80   68   85   85.5 77.6   94


B. Originality and significance. For originality and significance, we consider three dimensions including: (i)
method novelty (40 points), (ii) problem importance (30 points), and (iii) differentiation (30 points). The
prompt is as listed in Fig. 16. Corresponding evaluation results are listed in Table 9.
   System prompt for evaluating Originality and significance.

   You are the Originality & Significance Reviewer.
   Dimension rubric
   • Dim1 Method Novelty (40): substantive technical innovation vs trivial tweak; clarity of the new idea.
   • Dim2 Problem Importance (30): relevance and impact of the problem setting in math/application.
   • Dim3 Differentiation (30): explicit, evidence-backed comparison to closest prior work; stated improvements.
   Evaluation steps
   1. Extract the core idea/algorithm; enumerate what is genuinely new.
   2. Align against closest prior art listed; check material differences and evidence.
   3. Judge importance of the problem/benchmark/context and stated impact.
   Scoring rules
   • Inflated novelty with no evidence → heavy deduct Dim1.
   • Weak/contrived problem → deduct Dim2.
   • Missing/vague comparison → deduct Dim3 (cap total at 40 if over-claiming).
   • Evidence only from provided text.
   Output
   • JSON only with the provided schema.


                         Figure 16 System prompt for evaluating originality and significance.

C. Numerical experiments. For numerical experiments, we consider five dimensions including: (i) sufficiency
(25 points), (ii) baseline fairness (25 points), (iii) parameter specification (15 points), (iv) reproducibility (20
points), and (v) statistical reliability (15 points). The prompt is as listed in Fig. 17. Corresponding evaluation
results are listed in Table 10.
                                                                                                                   36


Table 9 Detailed Scores for originality and significance. S1, S2, S3 corresponds to evaluations performed with
GPT-5.1, GPT-5.4 and Gemini-3-Pro as the reviewer’s LLM backend, respectively. Full scores for each dimension are
100. The final score is the weighted average of all dimensions. Bold: best; underlined: second best.

                                        Dim 1 Score       Dim 2 Score        Dim 3 Score         Final Score
  AI Agent
                                       S1    S2    S3    S1     S2    S3    S1    S2       S3   S1   S2       S3
  ChatGPT (GPT-5.3)                    70    45    50    85     75    80    45    30       20   67 49.5 50
  ChatGPT Pro (GPT-5.4-Pro)            75    52    45    85     74    80    80    58       75   79.5 60.4 64.5
  Gemini (Gemini-3.1-Pro)              65    45    60    85     75    80    55    30       80   68 49.5 72
  Claude Pro (Claude Opus 4.6)         80    45    85    90     75    90    85    54       90   84.5 56.7 88
  CycleResearcher-ML-12B               45    20    20    75     70    60    25    10       10   48   32   29
  DeepScientist (GPT-5.4)              60    45    10    80     72    70    75    68       80   70.5 60   49
  AI Scientist-v2 (GPT-5.4)            75    55    40    80     72    80    65    50       40   73.5 58.6 52
  ARIS (GPT-5.4)                       78    72    60    85     78    80    80    80       80   80.7 76.2 72
  ReasFlow (GPT-5.4)                   78    58    85    85     76    90    90    72       90   83.7 67.6     88



  System prompt for evaluating Numerical experiments.

  You are the Numerical Experiments Reviewer.
  Dimension rubric
  • Dim1 Sufficiency (25): coverage of typical + edge cases; multiple difficulty levels.
  • Dim2 Baseline Fairness (25): fair comparison vs SOTA/classical baselines with matched settings/metrics.
  • Dim3 Parameter Specification (15): all key params (grid/step/tol/seeds) stated.
  • Dim4 Reproducibility (20): rerun detail—code/links/splits/seeds/ablations.
  • Dim5 Statistical Reliability (15): mean/std over multiple runs when stochastic; variance reported.
  Evaluation steps
  1. List tasks/datasets/cases; judge diversity and relevance.
  2. Inspect baselines and fairness (same splits, metrics, tuning budgets).
  3. Collect hyper/solver params; note missing ones.
  4. Check for code/links/seeds/ablations; assess rerun feasibility.
  5. For stochastic settings, verify repeats and variance reporting.
  Scoring rules
  • Single easy case or missing baselines → large deduct Dim1/Dim2.
  • Missing key params/seeds → deduct Dim3/Dim4.
  • No repeats in stochastic setting → deduct Dim5 (or 70 “not applicable” if deterministic).
  • Fabricated-looking tables or impossible gains → cap total at 30 pending credibility.
  Output
  • JSON only with given schema.


                         Figure 17 System prompt for evaluating numerical experiments.

D. Theory-experiment consistency. For originality and significance, we consider three dimensions including:
(i) convergence order verification (40 points), (ii) error bound verification (35 points), and (iii) discrepancy
explanation (25 points). The prompt is as listed in Fig. 18. Corresponding evaluation results are listed in
Table 11.
  System prompt for evaluating Theory-experiment consistency.

  You are the Theory–Experiment Consistency Reviewer.
  Dimension rubric
  • Dim1 Convergence Order Verification (40): theoretical O(hp ) vs empirical rates.
  • Dim2 Error Bound Verification (35): theoretical error bounds observed in results.
  • Dim3 Discrepancy Explanation (25): reasonable, specific explanations for mismatches.
                                                                                                                                                      37


Table 10 Detailed Scores for numerical experiments. S1, S2, S3 corresponds to evaluations performed with GPT-5.1,
GPT-5.4 and Gemini-3-Pro as the reviewer’s LLM backend, respectively. Full scores for each dimension are 100. The
final score is the weighted average of all dimensions. Bold: best; underlined: second best.

                                Dim 1 Score      Dim 2 Score         Dim 3 Score             Dim 4 Score        Dim 5 Score         Final Score
 AI Agent
                                S1   S2   S3    S1        S2   S3    S1   S2        S3    S1     S2   S3        S1    S2   S3     S1        S2     S3
 ChatGPT (GPT-5.3)              5    10    0    0          5     0   30   10        0     10     10   0         20     5   0      10.8       8    0
 ChatGPT Pro (GPT-5.4-Pro)      5     5    0    0          0     0   30   10        0     20      5    0        10     0   0      11.3      3.8   0
 Gemini (Gemini-3.1-Pro)        5     0    0    0          0     0   0    10        0     20      5    0        0      0   0      5.3       2.5   0
 Claude Pro (Claude Opus 4.6)   5     0    0    0          0     0   25    5        0     30     0    0         0      0   0      11        0.8   0
 CycleResearcher-ML-12B         15   15    0    20        10     0   20   10        0     15      5    0        10     0   0      16.3      8.8   0
 DeepScientist (GPT-5.4)        55   28   10    80        63    60   70   74        90    60     42   20        30    18   0      60.8      45   35
 AI Scientist-v2 (GPT-5.4)      60   30   30    65        45    40   30   15        0     30     10   0         25    10   0      45.5      24.5 17.5
 ARIS (GPT-5.4)                 10   15    0    15        25     0   30   30        0     20     15   0         10    10   0      16.3      19    0
 ReasFlow (GPT-5.4)             70   35   70    72        52    85   65   66        75    60     38   60        80    78   90     69.3      51    75.5




  Evaluation steps
  1. Extract theoretical rates/bounds and required conditions.
  2. Check convergence tables/plots for matching slopes; note mismatches.
  3. If mismatches, assess explanations for adequacy.
  Scoring rules
  • Missing empirical verification → deduct Dim1/Dim2.
  • Unexplained discrepancies → heavy deduct Dim3; may cap total at 40.
  • If no theory, but empirical convergence shown, score Dim1/Dim2 on evidence and note absence of theory.
  Output
  • JSON only per schema.


                       Figure 18 System prompt for evaluating theory-experiment consistency.

Table 11 Detailed Scores for theory-experiment consistency. S1, S2, S3 corresponds to evaluations performed with
GPT-5.1, GPT-5.4 and Gemini-3-Pro as the reviewer’s LLM backend, respectively. Full scores for each dimension are
100. The final score is the weighted average of all dimensions. Bold: best; underlined: second best.

                                              Dim 1 Score             Dim 2 Score                 Dim 3 Score                   Final Score
  AI Agent
                                          S1         S2        S3    S1        S2        S3      S1        S2        S3    S1       S2           S3
  ChatGPT (GPT-5.3)                       10          5        0     10         5        0       40        10        0     17.5     6.3           0
  ChatGPT Pro (GPT-5.4-Pro)               10          5        0     10         5        0       15        10        0     11.3     6.3           0
  Gemini (Gemini-3.1-Pro)                 5           0        0     0          0        0       40         5        0     12       1.3           0
  Claude Pro (Claude Opus 4.6)            10          0        0     10         0        0       40         9        0     17.5     2.3           0
  CycleResearcher-ML-12B                  15          5        0     10         5        0       20         0        0     14.5     3.8           0
  DeepScientist (GPT-5.4)                 20         15        0     20        10        0       60        62        0     30       25            0
  AI Scientist-v2 (GPT-5.4)               30         5         0     25        5         0       50        10        0     33.3     6.3           0
  ARIS (GPT-5.4)                          15         10        0     15        10        0       40        15        0     21.3     11.3          0
  ReasFlow (GPT-5.4)                      50         18        70    50        15        60      85        58        90    58.8        27        71.5


E. Writing and presentation. For numerical experiments, we consider five dimensions including: (i) structure
completeness (20 points), (ii) abstract quality (15 points), (iii) notation consistency (25 points), (iv) language
quality (20 points), and (v) definitions and notation (20 points). The prompt is as listed in Fig. 19.
Corresponding evaluation results are listed in Table 12.
                                                                                                                               38


   System prompt for evaluating Writing and presentation.

  You are the Writing & Presentation Reviewer.
  Dimension rubric
  • Dim1 Structure Completeness (20): standard flow Intro → Method → Analysis → Experiments → Conclusion.
  • Dim2 Abstract Quality (15): accurate summary of problem, method, main results.
  • Dim3 Notation Consistency (25): symbols defined before use; consistent.
  • Dim4 Language Quality (20): grammar/spelling; clarity.
  • Dim5 Definitions & Notation (20): key terms/notation clearly defined before first use.
  Evaluation steps
  1. Check abstract and section flow; note missing parts.
  2. Track definitions/notation; spot inconsistencies/overloading.
  3. Note language issues that impede understanding.
  Scoring rules
  • Missing sections/undefined notation → deduct Dim1/Dim3/Dim5.
  • Ambiguous or overloaded symbols → deduct Dim3/Dim5.
  • Poor grammar hurting clarity → deduct Dim4.
  Output
  • JSON only per schema.


                          Figure 19 System prompt for evaluating writing and presentation.

Table 12 Detailed Scores for writing and presentation. S1, S2, S3 corresponds to evaluations performed with
GPT-5.1, GPT-5.4 and Gemini-3-Pro as the reviewer’s LLM backend, respectively. Full scores for each dimension are
100. The final score is the weighted average of all dimensions. Bold: best; underlined: second best.

                                Dim 1 Score     Dim 2 Score     Dim 3 Score     Dim 4 Score     Dim 5 Score      Final Score
 AI Agent
                                S1   S2   S3    S1   S2   S3    S1   S2   S3    S1   S2   S3    S1   S2   S3    S1     S2     S3
 ChatGPT (GPT-5.3)              75   65   40    80   80   85    80   50   80    85   80   90    80   55   70    80     64.5
                                                                                                                          72.8
 ChatGPT Pro (GPT-5.4-Pro)      85   88   40    90   84   85    90   76   95    92   86   95    90   78   90    89.4   82 80.5
 Gemini (Gemini-3.1-Pro)        75   70   40    80   75   80    80   60   80    85   85   90    80   55   90    80     68.3
                                                                                                                          76
 Claude Pro (Claude Opus 4.6)   95   90   60    90   82   95    80   28   95    92   78   95    88   42   95    88.5   61.3
                                                                                                                          88
 CycleResearcher-ML-12B         65   30   75    60   45   60    35   15   10    75   55   50    35   15   10    52.8   39.5
                                                                                                                          29.5
 DeepScientist (GPT-5.4)        95   90   60    90   90   95    90   82   95    95   88   95    90   80   95    92        88
                                                                                                                       85.6
 AI Scientist-v2 (GPT-5.4)      85   55   50    80   65   40    80   45   30    85   70   70    75   40   20    81     54 41.5
 ARIS (GPT-5.4)                 90   92   70    92   90   90    85   78   90    92   90   90    85   82   90    88.5 85.8 86
 ReasFlow (GPT-5.4)             95   90   100   92   88   100   88   82   100   96   84   100   90   82   100   92     84.9 100


F. References. For originality and significance, we consider three dimensions including: (i) recency (30 points),
(ii) key reference coverage (45 points), and (iii) citation format (25 points). The prompt is as listed in Fig. 20.
Corresponding evaluation results are listed in Table 13.
   System prompt for evaluating References.

  You are the References Reviewer.
  Dimension rubric
  • Dim1 Recency (30): fraction of refs in last 3 years (target ≥30%).
  • Dim2 Key Reference Coverage (45): foundational/closest works cited.
  • Dim3 Citation Format (25): consistent formatting; DOIs where available.
  Evaluation steps
  1. Estimate year distribution; compute recent fraction.
  2. Check coverage of foundational/closest works mentioned.
  3. Inspect formatting consistency and DOIs.
  Scoring rules
  • Recent fraction <15% → strong deduct Dim1; 15–30% moderate deduct.
  • Missing obvious key works → deduct Dim2; multiple absences may cap total at 40.
  • Messy formatting/absent DOIs → deduct Dim3.
                                                                                                                   39



  Output
  • JSON only per schema.


                                Figure 20 System prompt for evaluating references.

Table 13 Detailed Scores for references. S1, S2, S3 corresponds to evaluations performed with GPT-5.1, GPT-5.4 and
Gemini-3-Pro as the reviewer’s LLM backend, respectively. Full scores for each dimension are 100. The final score is
the weighted average of all dimensions. Bold: best; underlined: second best.

                                         Dim 1 Score        Dim 2 Score        Dim 3 Score         Final Score
  AI Agent
                                        S1    S2    S3     S1    S2     S3    S1     S2    S3    S1     S2    S3
  ChatGPT (GPT-5.3)                     20     0     0     25    10      0    20      0     0    22.3   4.5   0
  ChatGPT Pro (GPT-5.4-Pro)             85    82    90     80    55     40    80     72    70    81.5   67.4 62.5
  Gemini (Gemini-3.1-Pro)               90    70    100    40    20     40    80     60    80    65     45   68
  Claude Pro (Claude Opus 4.6)          90    84    90     90    72     95    80     72    85    87.5   75.6 91
  CycleResearcher-ML-12B                10     0     0     5      0     0     5       0     0    6.5     0    0
  DeepScientist (GPT-5.4)               90    82    100    85    68     90    85     72    70    86.5   73.2 88
  AI Scientist-v2 (GPT-5.4)             85    75    100    80    45     80    80     60    50    81.5   57.8 78.5
  ARIS (GPT-5.4)                        85    72    70     88    82     90    90     78    90    87.6   78   84
  ReasFlow (GPT-5.4)                    95    74    100    92    76    100    88     44    90    91.9   67.4 97.5

G. Internal consistency. For originality and significance, we consider three dimensions including: (i) numerical
consistency (30 points), (ii) symbol consistency (30 points), and (iii) claim-evidence consistency (40 points).
The prompt is as listed in Fig. 21. Corresponding evaluation results are listed in Table 14.
  System prompt for evaluating Internal consistency.

  You are the Internal Consistency Reviewer.
  Dimension rubric
  • Dim1 Numerical Consistency (30): numbers match across abstract, main text, tables.
  • Dim2 Symbol Consistency (30): variables use the same symbols throughout.
  • Dim3 Claim–Evidence Consistency (40): every claim has theorem/proof/experiment support.
  Evaluation steps
  1. Cross-check key metrics/figures across sections.
  2. Track symbol definitions vs later usage.
  3. For each major claim, locate supporting evidence; flag missing links.
  Scoring rules
  • Conflicting numbers/symbols → heavy deduction Dim1/Dim2.
  • Unsupported claims → deduct Dim3; repeated issues may cap total at 40.
  Output
  • JSON only per schema.


                           Figure 21 System prompt for evaluating internal consistency.

H. Visual quality. For numerical experiments, we consider five dimensions including: (i) figure quality (25
points), (ii) equation typesetting (20 points), (iii) page layout (20 points), (iv) captions (15 points), and (v)
grayscale readability (20 points). The prompt is as listed in Fig. 22. Corresponding evaluation results are
listed in Table 15.
                                                                                                                                                   40


Table 14 Detailed Scores for internal consistency. S1, S2, S3 corresponds to evaluations performed with GPT-5.1,
GPT-5.4 and Gemini-3-Pro as the reviewer’s LLM backend, respectively. Full scores for each dimension are 100. The
final score is the weighted average of all dimensions. Bold: best; underlined: second best.

                                              Dim 1 Score              Dim 2 Score                Dim 3 Score                   Final Score
  AI Agent
                                          S1         S2        S3     S1        S2         S3    S1        S2        S3    S1       S2        S3
  ChatGPT (GPT-5.3)                       90         25        80     85        45         90    60        20        20    76.5     29        59
  ChatGPT Pro (GPT-5.4-Pro)               90         70        85     92        78         95    88        60        70    89.8     68.4      82
  Gemini (Gemini-3.1-Pro)                 85         65        60     85        60         90    55        20        25    73       45.5      55
  Claude Pro (Claude Opus 4.6)            90         55        95     80        20         95    85        33        95    85       35.7      95
  CycleResearcher-ML-12B                  60         25        20     35        10         10    25         5         0    38.5     12.5      9
  DeepScientist (GPT-5.4)                 90         86        100    90        82         100   88        76        100   89.2     80.8 100
  AI Scientist-v2 (GPT-5.4)               75         55        80     85        35         60    60        40        10    72       43   46
  ARIS (GPT-5.4)                          85         78        100    80        80         95    88        80        0     84.7     79.4 58.5
  ReasFlow (GPT-5.4)                      90         78        100    88        80         100   92        82        100   90.2     80.2 100


  System prompt for evaluating Visual quality.

  You are the Visual Quality Reviewer.
  Dimension rubric
  • Dim1 Figure Quality (25): resolution, readable fonts, labeled axes with units.
  • Dim2 Equation Typesetting (20): correct rendering, no overflow/broken symbols.
  • Dim3 Page Layout (20): consistent margins/spacing/fonts per template.
  • Dim4 Captions (15): numbered captions for all figures/tables.
  • Dim5 Grayscale Readability (20): distinguishable when printed in B/W.
  Evaluation steps
  1. Scan pages for figures/tables; check captions and readability.
  2. Inspect equations for rendering issues.
  3. Note layout consistency and grayscale legibility.
  Scoring rules
  • Blurry/uncaptioned figures → deduct Dim1/Dim4.
  • Broken equations → deduct Dim2.
  • Layout issues → deduct Dim3; poor grayscale → deduct Dim5.
  Output
  • JSON only per schema.


                                Figure 22 System prompt for evaluating visual quality.

Table 15 Detailed Scores for visual quality. S1, S2, S3 corresponds to evaluations performed with GPT-5.1, GPT-5.4
and Gemini-3-Pro as the reviewer’s LLM backend, respectively. Full scores for each dimension are 100. The final score
is the weighted average of all dimensions. Bold: best; underlined: second best.

                                Dim 1 Score      Dim 2 Score          Dim 3 Score            Dim 4 Score        Dim 5 Score        Final Score
 AI Agent
                                S1   S2   S3    S1        S2    S3    S1   S2        S3     S1   S2   S3        S1    S2   S3     S1     S2    S3
 ChatGPT (GPT-5.3)              80   35   0     90        75    90    85   80        85     85   60   80        90    85   100    85.8   65.8 67
 ChatGPT Pro (GPT-5.4-Pro)      80   60   0     92        85    95    90   82        90     85   75   80        95    70   100    88.2   73.7 69
 Gemini (Gemini-3.1-Pro)        60   20   0     85        75    90    85   70        90     60   10    0        90    50   100    76     45.5 56
 Claude Pro (Claude Opus 4.6)   75   55   0     90        80    95    85   82        90     85   68   80        80    85   100    82.5   73.4 69
 CycleResearcher-ML-12B         50   25   0     70        40    20    75   65        50     70   50   10        80    50   80     68     44.8 31.5
 DeepScientist (GPT-5.4)        80   50   0     95        82    95    90   84        95     85   78   40        85    80   100    86.8   73.4 64
 AI Scientist-v2 (GPT-5.4)      80   65   90    90        55    90    85   75        90     90   80   90        70    40   70     82.5   62.3 86
 ARIS (GPT-5.4)                 70   35   0     90        84    90    85   82        90     80   72    0        80    80   100    80.5   68.8 56
 ReasFlow (GPT-5.4)             90   76   85    95        82    100   92   80        100    90   84   100       85    52   85     90.4 74.4   93.3


I. AI and ethics compliance. For originality and significance, we consider three dimensions including: (i) GenAI
                                                                                                                       41


disclosure (30 points), (ii) data authenticity (45 points), and (iii) originality declaration (25 points). The
prompt is as listed in Fig. 23. Corresponding evaluation results are listed in Table 16.
  System prompt for evaluating AI and ethics compliance.

  You are the AI & Ethics Compliance Reviewer.
  Dimension rubric
  • Dim1 GenAI Disclosure (30): if AI tools used, disclosure present; if no evidence of use, disclosure not required.
  • Dim2 Data Authenticity (45): signs of fabricated/manipulated data (too-perfect results, repeated patterns).
  • Dim3 Originality Declaration (25): statements about no simultaneous submission / no plagiarism.
  Evaluation steps
  1. Search for AI/tool acknowledgments; if AI evident but undisclosed → penalize.
  2. Inspect experimental results for suspicious perfection; note any red flags.
  3. Look for originality/ethics statements; mark absence.
  Scoring rules
  • No AI use evidence & no disclosure needed → around 80 for Dim1; AI evident but undisclosed → severe
    deduction (∼20).
  • Suspicious data → deduct Dim2; genuine-looking data → around 85.
  • Missing originality declaration → deduct Dim3 (common omission ∼50).
  Output
  • JSON only per schema.


                        Figure 23 System prompt for evaluating AI and ethics compliance.

Table 16 Detailed Scores for AI and ethics compliance. S1, S2, S3 corresponds to evaluations performed with
GPT-5.1, GPT-5.4 and Gemini-3-Pro as the reviewer’s LLM backend, respectively. Full scores for each dimension are
100. The final score is the weighted average of all dimensions. Bold: best; underlined: second best.

                                         Dim 1 Score         Dim 2 Score         Dim 3 Score          Final Score
  AI Agent
                                        S1     S2     S3    S1     S2    S3     S1     S2    S3     S1     S2     S3
  ChatGPT (GPT-5.3)                     80     80     80    85     60     85    50     40     50    74.8   61     74.8
  ChatGPT Pro (GPT-5.4-Pro)             80     80     80    90     78     85    50     45     50    77     70.4   74.8
  Gemini (Gemini-3.1-Pro)               80     80     80    85     65     80    50     45    60     74.8   64.5   75
  Claude Pro (Claude Opus 4.6)          80     80     80    90     65     85    50     41     50    77     63.5   74.8
  CycleResearcher-ML-12B                80     80     0     75     45      0    50     40      0    70.3   54.3    0
  DeepScientist (GPT-5.4)               80     80     80    90     78     85    50     45     50    77     70.4   74.8
  AI Scientist-v2 (GPT-5.4)             80     80     20    85     55     20    50     35     50    74.8   57.5   27.5
  ARIS (GPT-5.4)                        80     80     80    90     72     85    50     50     50    77     68.9   74.8
  ReasFlow (GPT-5.4)                    80     80     80    90     84    100    60     40     50    79.5   71.8 81.5

Overall score. The overall score of the evaluated paper is computed via the following weighted average formula:

 Sfull = 0.25 · SA + 0.15 · SB + 0.2 · SC + 0.1 · SD + 0.1 · SE + 0.05 · SF + 0.05 · SG + 0.05 · SH + 0.05 · SI ,

where SA , SB , · · · , SI denote the scores of the nine scholarly aspects, respectively.

B.2   Experimental Details for Sec. 5.3.1
To evaluate the Related Work section produced by the SurveyAgent, we compare ReasFlow’s agent against a
base LLM baseline across three survey tasks ([16], [64], and [59]). Each task is generated with four different
LLM backbones (DeepSeek, GPT-5.1, GPT-5.4, and Claude Sonnet 4.6), and independently scored by three
evaluation models for robustness. The evaluation employs two dimensions, each scored on a 1-10 scale:
   • Content Accuracy (Dim1): assesses the factual correctness of cited paper descriptions. For each article, 15
     citations are sampled and verified against a 339-paper FAISS vector database. Papers with valid arXiv
                                                                                                                 42


        IDs are verified via full-text extraction; others are matched through semantic search. Each citation
        receives an accuracy level from 0 (fabricated) to 3 (essentially correct).
   • Citation Relevance (Dim2): evaluates whether citations align with the survey plan and are topically
     appropriate. The score combines key reference coverage, per-citation relevance ratings (0–2), citation
     count bonuses, and off-topic penalties.

B.2.1    Generation Details
Each of the three tasks is associated with a survey_plan.md file that specifies the research topic, required
structure, and a list of key references. This plan is provided verbatim to both ReasFlow and the baseline as
the sole input.
ReasFlow (SurveyAgent). The SurveyAgent is invoked through its CLI in fully autonomous mode. The agent
reads the survey plan and executes a structured three-step workflow: (i) SurveyWriteOutline generates
a section outline; (ii) SurveyWriteSurvey compiles a comprehensive survey report by querying both the
built-in FAISS paper database (339 knowledge cards) and external sources via the Semantic Scholar API;
and (iii) SurveyWriteRelatedWork produces the final related_works.tex and references.bib. The agent
has access to the full tool suite described in Appendix A, including semantic paper search, citation network
traversal, and an automated review tool that evaluates the draft across four quality dimensions and triggers
iterative revision.
Baseline (Base LLM). The baseline uses an identical LLM backbone but operates through a minimal agent
that lacks the structured survey tools. It receives the same survey plan and is instructed to produce the
same output files using only basic literature search tools (LiteratureSearch, LiteratureGetReferences,
LiteratureGetCitations) and file-writing capabilities. No structured outline, multi-step survey compilation,
or automated review is available; the baseline generates the final output in a single agent pass.
Variant matrix and orchestration. Each of the two agents is paired with four LLM backbones, DeepSeek-v3.2,
GPT-5.1, GPT-5.4, and Claude Sonnet 4.6, yielding 2 × 4 = 8 generation variants per task and 8 × 3 = 24
total generation runs. Each (task, variant) pair executes in an isolated workspace directory to prevent cross-
contamination. The entire pipeline is driven by a batch script that reads a YAML configuration specifying
the task list, variant definitions (agent type, LLM backbone, and mode), and evaluation model list. For each
(task, variant), the script (i) creates an isolated workspace, (ii) writes the survey plan into the workspace, (iii)
updates the agent’s model configuration to the target backbone, (iv) invokes the corresponding agent CLI,
and (v) copies the resulting related_works.tex and references.bib to the shared evaluation directory.
Generation runs that do not produce valid output files are logged as failures and excluded from evaluation.

B.2.2    Evaluation Details
The evaluation pipeline proceeds in two phases. First, for Content Accuracy, each of the 15 sampled citations
undergoes a multi-step verification: (i) if the citation has a valid arXiv ID, the full PDF is downloaded and its
first 3 000 characters are extracted as evidence; (ii) otherwise, we query Semantic Scholar with the title and
authors, and an LLM disambiguates the best match from the candidate list; (iii) the evaluator LLM receives
the paper’s actual content alongside the description in the Related Work and assigns an accuracy level on a
0–3 scale. The accuracy levels are then mapped to a normalized score: level 3 → 1.0, level 2 → 0.65, level 1
→ 0.15, level 0 → 0.0, and rescaled to [1, 10].
Second, for Citation Relevance, the pipeline (i) checks all key references specified in the survey plan for
coverage; (ii) scores each sampled citation’s relevance (0–2 scale: strongly relevant, weakly relevant, or
irrelevant) against the plan; and (iii) computes the final score via:
                                                                                                    
      Dim2 = min 10, rcov × 7 + rrel × 2 + min(3, ncite /40 × 3) − max(0, (rirr − 0.15)/0.85 × 2.5) ,
                         | {z }        | {z }     |        {z         } |           {z             }
                        key coverage   quality bonus    richness bonus              off-topic penalty

where rcov is the key reference coverage rate, rrel is the fraction of strongly relevant citations, ncite is the
total citation count, and rirr is the fraction of irrelevant citations. Fabricated papers detected in Dim1 are
automatically counted as irrelevant.
                                                                                                                 43


The complete prompts for the two evaluation dimensions are presented in Fig. 24 and Fig. 25.

  Prompt for content accuracy verification (Dim1)

  You are an academic integrity reviewer. Judge whether the description in the Related Works accurately represents
  the cited paper.
  Important Note: Multi-Paper Joint Citations
  If the citation appears together with other papers (e.g., cite a, b, c), the description may be a joint summary
  of the entire group. In this case, only judge whether this paper supports some reasonable part of the
  description. If another paper in the group covers a portion the current paper does not address, do not penalize
  the current paper for that.
  Source Paper Information
  • Title: [paperTitle]
  • Authors: [paperAuthors]
  • Year: [paperYear]
  • Paper excerpt (first 3000 chars): [paperContent]
  Description in Related Works [description]
  Task Check whether the description matches the paper’s actual content:
  1. Is the paper’s main method/contribution accurately described?
  2. Are there exaggerations, distortions, or clearly incorrect statements?
  3. Are key data/conclusions wrong?
  4. For multi-paper citations, only judge if this paper supports some reasonable part.
  Output JSON: accuracyLevel (0/1/2/3), hallucinationType (null / "misrepresentation" / "exaggeration" /
  "wrongMetadata"), details ("explanation or null if accurate").
  accuracyLevel rubric:
  • 3 = Essentially correct: consistent with paper content, no factual errors
  • 2 = Minor deviation: does not affect reader understanding
  • 1 = Substantial error in method/contribution: would mislead readers
  • 0 = Completely fabricated or entirely irrelevant to this paper


      Figure 24 Prompt for verifying content accuracy of individual citations in the Related Works (Dim1).

  Prompt for citation relevance scoring (Dim2)

  You are an academic paper reviewer evaluating the relevance of a citation in a Related Works section.
  Survey Plan [plan]
  Citation Under Evaluation
  • Title: [title]
  • Authors: [authors]
  • Year: [year]
  • Venue: [venue]
  Scoring Rubric (0–2)
  Judge relevance strictly against the Survey Plan:
  2 = Strongly relevant: satisfies any of the following:
  • Explicitly listed in the Plan’s "Key References"
  • A directly representative work of a core research direction described in the Plan
  • A background work that directly motivates this research, clearly mentioned or highly aligned with the Plan
  1 = Weakly relevant: satisfies any of the following:
  • An adjacent technique to the Plan’s core direction, with some overlap but not central
  • Broader context for the research background; reasonable to mention but not emphasized by the Plan
  0 = Irrelevant:
  • No apparent connection to any core direction in the Plan
  • Clearly belongs to a different research area
  Output JSON: relevance (0–2), reason ("brief explanation").


               Figure 25 Prompt for scoring per-citation relevance against the survey plan (Dim2).
                                                                                                                          44


The total score is Dim1 + Dim2 (out of 20). Results are summarized in Table 17. To assess evaluation
robustness, we employ three independent evaluation models (GPT-5.1, Sonnet 4.6, and DeepSeek) and report
per-judger total scores for each generation backbone. The SurveyAgent achieves an overall advantage of
+3.26 points over the base model. The improvement is predominantly driven by Content Accuracy (Dim1:
+2.92), as the agent’s citations originate from the verified paper library and thus achieve high retrieval hit
rates. Across all 36 paired comparisons (4 backbones × 3 tasks × 3 evaluation models), the SurveyAgent
wins in 28 cases (77.8% win rate).

Table 17 Per-task evaluation of the SurveyAgent vs. the base LLM across four generation backbones and three
evaluation models. Each cell reports the total score (Content Accuracy + Citation Relevance, out of 20). For each
evaluation model, the best ReasFlow score and the best advantage are highlighted in bold.

                         Judger: GPT-5.1        Judger: Sonnet 4.6        Judger: DeepSeek               Average
  Task    Backbone
                       Base    RF      Adv.     Base    RF      Adv.     Base    RF      Adv.    Base     RF       Adv.
          DeepSeek     11.70   18.34   +6.64    14.39   18.25   +3.86    11.87   17.19   +5.32   12.65   17.93     +5.27
          GPT-5.1      19.27   18.83   −0.44    19.32   18.08   −1.24    19.00   16.44   −2.56   19.20   17.78     −1.41
  [16]    GPT-5.4      8.99    17.09   +8.10    9.26    17.01   +7.75    8.99    16.15   +7.16   9.08    16.75     +7.67
          Sonnet 4.6   10.86   17.77   +6.91    11.31   17.87   +6.56    11.04   16.07   +5.03   11.07   17.24     +6.17
          Average      12.71   18.01   +5.30    13.57   17.80   +4.23    12.72   16.46   +3.74   13.00   17.42     +4.42
          DeepSeek     13.63   14.56   +0.93    13.04   14.75   +1.71    13.18   12.79   −0.39   13.28   14.03     +0.75
          GPT-5.1      14.24   16.27   +2.03    15.76   16.90   +1.14    13.55   16.71   +3.16   14.52   16.63     +2.11
  [64]    GPT-5.4      13.68   15.51   +1.83    13.81   17.15   +3.34    12.21   15.80   +3.59   13.23   16.15     +2.92
          Sonnet 4.6   14.37   15.50   +1.13    13.43   15.42   +1.99    14.28   13.79   −0.49   14.03   14.90     +0.88
          Average      13.98   15.46   +1.48    14.01   16.05   +2.04    13.30   14.77   +1.47   13.77   15.43     +1.66
          DeepSeek     6.52    18.25   +11.73   7.56    18.25   +10.69   10.33   18.59   +8.26   8.14     18.36    +10.23
          GPT-5.1      6.00    16.70   +10.70   6.00    15.86   +9.86    9.00    15.54   +6.54   7.00    16.03     +9.03
  [59]    GPT-5.4      12.32   13.77   +1.45    12.99   13.90   +0.91    12.19   13.33   +1.14   12.50   13.67     +1.17
          Sonnet 4.6   17.47   11.38   −6.09    17.87   13.29   −4.58    16.62   10.18   −6.44   17.32   11.62     −5.70
          Average      10.58   15.03   +4.45    11.11   15.32   +4.22    12.04   14.41   +2.37   11.24   14.92     +3.68
  Overall Average      12.42   16.16   +3.74    12.90   16.39   +3.50    12.69   15.22   +2.53   12.67   15.92     +3.26


B.3      Experimental Details for Sec. 5.3.2
B.3.1    Generation Details
Table 18 lists all 35 evaluated tasks, 20 of which are drawn from MLR-Bench. The generation prompts are
presented in Fig. 26 (for ReasFlow) and Fig. 27 (for the baselines). We provide the baselines with more
detailed requirements to ensure they can produce comparable results.

   Prompt for algorithmic tests (ReasFlow).

  Please design an algorithm based on the following.
  Task: {task}
  Research Idea: {idea}
  Please work in AUTO MODE and complete the full algorithm design without waiting for user confirmation.


                                 Figure 26 ReasFlow prompt for algorithmic tests.

   Prompt for algorithmic tests (Baseline).

  You are an expert algorithm designer. Given a research task and a research idea, produce TWO outputs in the
  current working directory:
  1. A complete Python implementation saved as code/algorithm.py
                                                                                                                45



  2. A detailed algorithm design report saved as document/algorithm_design.md
  CRITICAL INSTRUCTIONS FOR FILE CREATION:
  • Create each file with a SEPARATE apply_patch command (one patch per file)
  • Create code/algorithm.py FIRST, then document/algorithm_design.md SECOND
  • Keep each patch simple — avoid backticks, special characters, or long heredocs inside the content
  The Python implementation should:
  • Define a class with "Algorithm" or "Optimizer" in its name
  • Implement an optimize() method (or equivalent main entry point)
  • Implement a get_convergence_history() method that returns optimization history
  • Be self-contained and runnable with standard ML libraries (numpy, scipy, torch, etc.)
  • Include a if __name__ == "__main__": block with a toy example demonstrating usage
  The algorithm design report MUST include all of the following sections:
  1. Algorithm Overview — what problem it solves and the core intuition
  2. Key Ideas and Innovations — what is novel about this approach
  3. Algorithm Steps — detailed procedural description (numbered steps)
  4. Pseudocode — in algorithmic/LaTeX-style notation
  5. Complexity Analysis — time and space complexity with justification
  6. Implementation Notes — key implementation considerations, dependencies, frameworks
  7. Hyperparameters — table of hyperparameters with defaults and ranges
  8. Expected Behavior and Limitations — what the algorithm should achieve and its known limitations
  IMPORTANT: Do NOT include experimental design, dataset descriptions, or evaluation metrics. Focus ONLY
  on the algorithm itself.
  The document/ and code/ directories already exist in your working directory.

  Task: {task}
  Research Idea: {idea}

  Please create both files now.


                                  Figure 27 Baseline prompt for algorithmic tests.

B.3.2   Evaluation Details
We evaluate whether the generated Python code for the algorithm is directly runnable. A first-run success is
defined as the script executing without runtime errors on its initial attempt. If it fails, the agent is instructed
to retry the task until it either succeeds or the total time limit is reached.

B.4     Experimental Details for Sec. 5.3.3
B.4.1   Generation Details
In this subsection, we clarify the prompt used to generate the proof reports for further evaluation and
comparison, which is shown in Fig. 28.

B.4.2    Evaluation Details
In this subsection, we provide detailed implementation and results for evaluating the proof reports generated
by ReasFlow and baselines. The complete prompt for the ProofReviewAgent is as presented in Fig. 29. The
detailed assessment including scores for each different dimension is as listed in Table 19.
                                                                                                                         46




Prompt for Proof Report Generation
Algorithm 3 Subspace SCAFFOLD
Require: Initial model x0 and control variables {c0i }N
                                                      i=1 , c ; local learning rate ηl ; global learning rate ηg ;
                                                             0

  local steps K; number of sampled clients S; subspace dimension r; outer cycles T
  Initialize subspace projector: obtain P0 ∈ O(Rr×d ) by common random seed
  for t = 0, · · · , T − 1 do
     Decompose model and control: xtproj = Pt xt , xtres = xt − Pt⊤ xtproj , ctproj = Pt ct , ctres = ct − Pt⊤ ctproj
     for all client i in parallel do
        Client control split: cti,proj = Pt cti , cti,res = cti − Pt⊤ cti,proj
                      t,0
        Initialize yi,proj  = xtproj
        for k = 0, . . . , K − 1 do
                                                        t,k
           Reconstruct full model: yit,k = Pt⊤ yi,proj       + xtres
           Compute mini-batch gradient: gi = ∇F (yit,k ; ξit,k )
                                                  t,k
                                         t,k+1           t,k
           Update projected model: yi,proj         = yi,proj   − ηl (Pt git,k − cti,proj + ctproj )
        end for
                                                                       PK−1
        Update client control: ct+1
                                i   = (I − Pt⊤ Pt )cti + K
                                                         1
                                                           Pt⊤ Pt         k=0       git,k
     end for
                                                             P xtproj −yi,proj
                                                                        t,K
     Update projected model: xt+1     t        ηl K
                              proj = xproj − ηg N               i      ηl K
                                                                        PN −1 PK−1
                                         proj + xres , c
     Backfill to full space: xt+1 = Pt⊤ xt+1     t       t+1
                                                             = N1K            i=0           k=0   Pt⊤ Pt git,k + ctres
     Update projector: generate new Pt+1 for next round
  end for

Prove the convergence result of this algorithm under stochastic non-convex scenario, with the following assump-
tions:
Assumption B.1 (L-smoothness). Each client loss Fi : Rd → R satisfies ∥∇Fi (x) − ∇Fi (y)∥ ≤ L∥x − y∥ for all
x, y.
Assumption B.2 (Bounded variance and independence across samples). For stochastic gradients gi (x; ξ),
E[gi (x; ξ) | x] = ∇Fi (x) and E[∥gi (x; ξ) − ∇Fi (x)∥2 ] ≤ σ 2 . In addition, all stochastic gradient noises gi (x; ξ) −
∇Fi (x) are independent across different clients i.
Assumption B.3 (Shared random subspace). In each outer round k, all clients use the same orthonormal
Pk ∈ O(Rr×d ), with Pk Pk⊤ = Ir and EPk [Pk⊤ Pk ] = (r/d)Id .
Note that you should not introduce bounded gradient assumption or assumptions on data heterogeneity. You
should try your best to give the correct proofs and generate a latex file as a final report of the task. The report
should be written like the theory section of an academic paper.



                          Figure 28 Prompt for generating proof reports for evaluation.
                                                                                                                         47


Table 18 Task list for evaluation. Each task specifies a concrete research problem and a reference algorithm design
document used to seed the evaluation.

 Source                                 Task ID                          Description
                                        iclr2025_mldpr                   Machine Learning for Drug Pharmacology Research
                                        iclr2025_scsl                    Self-Supervised and Contrastive Learning
                                        iclr2025_verifai                 Verification and Formal Methods for AI
                                        iclr2025_bi_align                Bidirectional Alignment in LLMs
                                        iclr2025_buildingtrust           Building Trust in AI Systems
 ICLR 2025 workshops (MLR-Bench)
                                        iclr2025_data_problems           Data-centric ML Problems
                                        iclr2025_dl4c                    Deep Learning for Code
                                        iclr2025_question                Question Answering and Reasoning
                                        iclr2025_scope                   Scope and Generalisation in NLP
                                        iclr2025_wsl                     Weakly Supervised Learning
                                        neurips2023_opt                  NeurIPS 2023 optimization workshop
                                        neurips2024_opt                  NeurIPS 2024 optimization workshop
                                        neurips2023_otml                 optimization and ML (NeurIPS 2023)
                                        neurips2023_heavytails           Heavy-tail phenomena in optimization
                                        neurips2023_federated_learning   Federated optimization
 Optimization workshops (MLR-Bench)
                                        neurips2024_fitml                Fitting ML models at scale
                                        icml2023_sods                    Sparse and over-parameterised deep systems
                                        icml2023_differentiable          Differentiable programming
                                        icml2023_fl                      Federated learning (ICML 2023)
                                        icml2024_hdlearning              High-dimensional learning
                                        opt_adam_variants                Adaptive optimisers (Adam variants)
                                        opt_lora_lowrank                 Low-rank adaptation / LoRA
                                        opt_quantization_training        Quantisation-aware training
                                        opt_sparsification               Gradient and weight sparsification
                                        opt_curriculum_data              Curriculum and data ordering
                                        opt_multiobjective               Multi-objective optimization
                                        opt_zeroth_order                 Zeroth-order and black-box optimization
 Fine-grained optimization (OR-Bench)   opt_memory_efficient             Memory-efficient training
                                        opt_second_order                 Second-order methods
                                        opt_bilevel                      Bilevel optimization
                                        opt_online_learning              Online learning and regret minimisation
                                        opt_diffusion_training           Diffusion model training optimization
                                        opt_distributed                  Distributed and asynchronous optimization
                                        opt_hpo                          Hyperparameter optimization
                                        opt_mixed_precision              Mixed-precision training



  System prompt for the ProofReviewAgent


  Role
  You are a top-tier machine learning theoretical scientist and a senior reviewer for prestigious academic conferences
  such as NeurIPS and ICML. You are renowned for your extremely rigorous, objective, and fastidious academic
  attitude.

  Task
  Your task is to evaluate the quality of a theoretical proof generated by an AI. I will provide the [Problem
  Definition & Settings], [Target Algorithm & Conclusion], and the [AI-Generated Proof Process]. You must
  meticulously scrutinize every step of the proof and provide a comprehensive score (0-100) along with a detailed
  review report.

  Evaluation Criteria
  Please strictly follow the four dimensions below for review and scoring. Note that mathematical proofs require
  absolute rigor; any single fatal logical gap may render the entire proof invalid.
                                                                                                                   48



Dimension 1: Academic Formalism & Formatting (10 pts)
• Full Score Standard: Possesses the standard proof structure of an academic paper (e.g., clear Lemmas,
  Theorems, Proof environments, and professional LaTeX formatting).
• Deductions: If the response is merely a wall of text lacking mathematical formulas or fails to provide a basic
  proof framework (e.g., "Proof:", "Q.E.D."), deduct all points for this dimension.

Dimension 2: Target Alignment & Relevance (10 pts)
• Full Score Standard: The proven conclusion, loss functions used, and algorithmic update steps are perfectly
  consistent with the [Problem Definition & Settings].
• Deductions: If the proof conclusion is irrelevant to the requested algorithm or setting (e.g., proving a
  standalone SGD when Federated Learning was required, or assuming convexity when a non-convex setting was
  specified), assign 0 points for this dimension.

Dimension 3: Consistency of Assumptions & Notation (10 pts)
• Full Score Standard: Strictly uses only the provided assumptions (e.g., L-smoothness, bounded variance);
  notations must be consistent throughout the text and clearly defined.
• Deductions:
• Introducing undeclared strong assumptions (e.g., "assuming bounded gradients" or "assuming i.i.d. data"):
  Deduct 5 points per occurrence.
• Inconsistent notation or using undefined variables (e.g., using x in one step and suddenly switching to w):
  Deduct 1-3 points depending on severity.

Dimension 4: Logical Deduction & Correctness (50 pts) [Core Dimension]
Examine the formula derivations line-by-line. LLMs frequently "hallucinate" in this area. Categorize logical
leaps into the following three types:
• Trivial Skips: Basic algebraic simplifications, combining like terms, or applying standard inequalities (e.g.,
   Cauchy-Schwarz, Peter-Paul). No deduction.
• Suspicious Skips: Consolidating several complex equations into a non-trivial new expression without
   intermediate steps or cross-term analysis; or claiming "it is easy to see" or "similarly" for steps that are not
   immediately obvious. Deduct 5-10 points per "Suspicious Skip." If the proof contains excessive suspicious
   leaps that make verification impossible, the score for this dimension cannot exceed 20 points.
• Explicit Errors / Fake Proofs: Incorrect inequality directions, expectation operators penetrating non-linear
   functions, matrix dimension mismatches, or "fake proofs" intentionally fabricated to reach the target result.
   Any single "Explicit Error" results in 0 points for this dimension.

Dimension 5: Theoretical Significance & Strength (20 pts)
• Criteria: Evaluate the "Price-Performance Ratio" of the theorem. A high-quality proof should aim for the
  strongest possible conclusion using the weakest possible assumptions.
• Scoring Logic:
• Strong Conclusion: Does it provide a tight convergence rate (e.g., O(1/ϵ2 ) vs O(1/ϵ))? Does it handle the
  most general case (e.g., non-convex)?
• Weak Assumptions: Does it avoid restrictive assumptions like "Bounded Gradients" or "Strong Convexity"?
• Penalty: If the proof achieves the goal by adding "trivializing" assumptions (making the problem too easy),
  deduct points from the total score.

Output Format
Please output and save your review results in JSON format to ensure it can be parsed:
{
"Review_Process": {
"Step_by_Step_Critique": "Analyze the proof process line-by-line here. Explicitly identify
,→  which steps are normal, which are suspicious skips, and which are explicit errors. You must
,→  include specific formula references.",
                                                                                                                        49



  "Assumption_Check": "Analyze whether the author abused assumptions or omitted critical given
  ,→  assumptions.",
  "Alignment_Check": "Analyze whether the proof truly addresses the specified problem and
  ,→  algorithm.",
  "Strength_Check": "Analyze the theoretical significance of the provided theorem."
  },
  "Scores": {
  "Dim1_Formalism": [0-10],
  "Dim2_Relevance": [0-10],
  "Dim3_Consistency": [0-10],
  "Dim4_Logical_Rigor": [0-50],
  "Dim5_Strength": [0-20]
  },
  "Total_Score": [0-100],
  "Final_Verdict": "Accept / Weak Reject / Strong Reject (A one-sentence summary of whether the
  ,→  proof is credible)"
  }
  Use the write() tool provided to save the above JSON review to a file if the user provides a file path.


                                 Figure 29 System prompt for the ProofReviewAgent.

Table 19 Detailed Scores of the theoretical reports reviewed by the ProofReviewAgent. S1, S2, S3 corresponds to
evaluations performed with GPT-5.1, GPT-5.4 and Gemini-3-Pro as the reviewer’s LLM backend, respectively. Bold:
best; underlined: second best.

                            Dim 1 Score (10)   Dim 2 Score (10)   Dim 3 Score (10)   Dim 4 Score (50)   Dim 5 Score (20)
 AI Agent
                            S1     S2   S3     S1   S2    S3      S1   S2    S3      S1   S2    S3      S1   S2    S3
 ChatGPT (GPT-5.3)           8      8    2     4     2     0      5     1     5      0     0     0      12    4     0
 Gemini (Gemini-3.1-Pro)    10      9   10     9     6    10      8     3    10      38    0     0      16    6    18
 ReasLingo (Gemini-3-Pro)   10      9   10     9     8    10      9     3    10      45   18     0      18   10    10
 ReasLingo (GPT-5.1)        10      9   10     9     6    10      9     5    10      42    8     0      17   7     10
 ReasLingo (GPT-5.4)        10      9   10     9     5     0      10    5    10      46   32    40      17   6      0
 ProofGrader (GPT-5.1)      10      9   10     9     2     0      10    3    10      46   16    50      17   4      0
 ProofGrader (GPT-5.4)      10      9   10     9     7    10      10    3    10      46   12    40      18    8     5
 QED (GPT-5.4)              10     10   10     10    2     0      10    9    10      50   24    50      18    6     0
 ReasFlow (Gemini-3-Pro)    10      9   10     9     8    10      9     6    10      45   24    50      18    15   20
 ReasFlow (GPT-5.1)         10      9   10     9     8    10      10    5    10      46   16    50      18    7    20
 ReasFlow (GPT-5.4)         10     10   10     9     8    10      10    8    10      47    38   50      18   14    20



B.5     Evaluation Details for Sec. 5.3.4
B.5.1   Generation Details
We evaluate the agents by having them continue to design and implement experiments based on their outputs
from Sec. 5.3.2. The generation prompts are provided in Fig. 30 (for ReasFlow) and Fig. 31 (for the baselines).
We provide the baselines with more detailed requirements to ensure they can produce comparable results.

  Prompt for experimental tests (ReasFlow).

  You are given an algorithm design report and implementation script for the following research.
  Task: {task}
  Research Idea: {idea}
  Algorithm Design Report (summary): {alg_report[:3000]}
  Algorithm Script Location: {alg_script_hint}
  Please work in AUTO MODE:
                                                                                                               50



1. Read the algorithm design report and script carefully
2. Design a comprehensive experimental plan (experiment_plan.md)
3. Execute all planned experiments
4. Generate experiment_report.md with full results and analysis
5. Create publication-quality figures
Complete all experiments without waiting for user confirmation. Time limit: {N} hours.


                            Figure 30 ReasFlow prompt for experimental tests.

Prompt for experimental tests (Baseline).

You are an expert ML researcher. You previously designed an algorithm. Now you must ACTUALLY EXECUTE
experiments to evaluate it.
The algorithm design report and implementation code are available in the document/ and code/ directories of
your current working directory:
• document/algorithm_design.md — the algorithm design report
• code/algorithm.py — the algorithm implementation

STEP-BY-STEP INSTRUCTIONS (follow in order):

Step 1: Install dependencies
Run: pip install numpy scipy torch matplotlib scikit-learn pandas Install any additional packages re-
quired by code/algorithm.py.

Step 2: Verify the algorithm runs
Run: cd code && python algorithm.py If it fails, fix the import errors or missing dependencies, then re-run.

Step 3: Write experiment scripts
Create code/run_experiments.py that:
• Imports and instantiates the algorithm from algorithm.py
• Defines 2-3 baseline methods for comparison (e.g., random search, grid search, SGD)
• Runs all methods on 2-3 test problems (e.g., Rosenbrock, Rastrigin, or task-relevant benchmarks)
• Records metrics: convergence speed, final objective value, runtime
• Saves results to results/ directory as CSV or JSON

Step 4: Run experiments
Execute: cd code && python run_experiments.py Capture all output and results.

Step 5: Write experiment report
Save document/experiment_report.md containing:
1. Experimental Setup — datasets/problems, metrics, baselines, hyperparameters used
2. Implementation Details — how experiments were set up and run
3. Main Results — performance tables with ACTUAL numbers from your runs
4. Ablation Studies — effect of key hyperparameters
5. Analysis and Discussion — why the method works (or doesn’t)
CRITICAL RULES:
• You MUST actually run code and report real numbers. Do NOT fabricate results.
• If a script fails, debug it and fix it before reporting.
• All numerical results must come from actual execution output.
• Create the results/ directory if needed: mkdir -p results

Task: {task} Research Idea: {idea}
                                                                                                                          51


                                  Figure 31 Baseline prompt for experimental tests.

B.5.2   Evaluation Details
We use both GPT-5.4 and Claude Sonnet 4.6 to evaluate the outputs. The prompts provided in Fig. 32 are
adapted from MLR-Bench, with metrics we propose marked as [NEW].
  Prompt for evaluating experimental results.

  You will be given an experimental document produced by an AI agent. Unlike the standard MLR-Bench setup,
  this agent received an algorithm design report and script (not a full research proposal) as input, and was
  responsible for BOTH autonomously designing the experimental plan AND executing the experiments. Therefore,
  please evaluate both the quality of the experimental design (which the agent produced autonomously) and the
  quality of the execution results.
  Please evaluate along all dimensions below (1-10 scale) and respond in valid JSON.


  EVALUATION DIMENSIONS

  [NEW] DESIGN SOUNDNESS (1-10)
  How rigorous and well-structured is the experimental plan that the agent autonomously designed? Consider:
  appropriateness of baselines, clarity of evaluation metrics, inclusion of ablation studies, and internal logic of the
  plan.
  9-10 - The experimental design is highly rigorous, with appropriate baselines, evaluation metrics, and ablation
  studies clearly defined.
  7-8 - The design is mostly sound with only minor gaps (e.g., one missing baseline).
  5-6 - The design has some weaknesses but covers the main experimental objectives.
  3-4 - The design has significant gaps or logical flaws in the experimental plan.
  1-2 - The experimental design is absent or fundamentally unsound.

  [NEW] DESIGN COMPLETENESS (1-10)
  Does the experimental plan include all necessary components: baseline comparisons, appropriate evaluation
  metrics, and ablation studies?
  9-10 - All necessary components are present and well-defined (baselines, metrics, ablations, statistical significance
  considerations).
  7-8 - Most components are present with minor omissions (e.g., no ablation study).
  5-6 - Some important components are missing (e.g., no baseline or no ablation).
  3-4 - Many key components are absent; plan is skeletal.
  1-2 - The experimental plan is severely incomplete or nonexistent.

  [NEW] ALGORITHM-EXPERIMENT ALIGNMENT (1-10)
  Does the experimental design fully leverage the core contribution of the provided algorithm script and design
  report? Is there a clear logical connection between the algorithm and the experimental setup?
  9-10 - The experiments are perfectly tailored to demonstrate the algorithm’s core contribution; every experiment
  directly tests a key claim.
  7-8 - Strong alignment with only minor disconnects (some tangential experiments).
  5-6 - Partial alignment; some experiments are not directly motivated by the algorithm.
  3-4 - Weak alignment; experiment and algorithm feel largely independent.
  1-2 - No meaningful connection between the algorithm and experimental design.

  SOUNDNESS (1-10) [Most Important]
  Are the experimental results based on REAL execution rather than synthetic/fabricated data? This is the
  most critical dimension. Check result files (results/*.csv, results/*.json, data/*.csv, data/*.json) AND
                                                                                                                52



execution logs for evidence of actual runs. Note: some agents output results directly to a results/ directory
rather than logs.
MANDATORY RULE - apply before any other scoring: If BOTH of the following are true: (a)
execution_artifacts shows [NO DATA FILES FOUND] (no CSV/JSON result files exist), AND (b) log shows
[NO LOG FOUND] or contains no actual execution traces (no stack traces, no printed values, no timing
information - just setup text), THEN: Soundness MUST be scored 1-2, and has_hallucination MUST be true.
A polished experiment_report.md without any execution evidence is fabricated by definition.
9-10 - Results clearly stem from genuine execution with verifiable logs and outputs.
7-8 - Results appear genuine with minor documentation gaps.
5-6 - Mostly genuine but with some suspicious or unverifiable claims.
3-4 - Significant portions appear fabricated or hallucinated.
1-2 - Results are clearly synthetic/fabricated; no genuine experiments were run.

CONSISTENCY (1-10)
Does the execution faithfully follow the experimental plan? Are the reported results consistent with the
experimental setup described?
9-10 - Execution precisely matches the plan; all reported numbers are traceable.
7-8 - Mostly consistent with minor deviations (well-explained).
5-6 - Some inconsistencies between plan and execution.
3-4 - Significant gaps between stated plan and actual execution.
1-2 - Execution is entirely inconsistent with or ignores the plan.

COMPLETENESS (1-10)
Were all designed experiments actually completed and reported?
9-10 - All planned experiments completed; all results reported with full detail.
7-8 - Most experiments completed; minor omissions explained.
5-6 - Roughly half of planned experiments completed.
3-4 - Only a small fraction of planned experiments completed.
1-2 - Almost no experiments completed or reported.

NOVELTY (1-10)
How novel and creative is the experimental design in terms of evaluation methodology?
9-10 - Innovative evaluation approach that provides unique insights.
7-8 - Some novel evaluation choices beyond standard benchmarks.
5-6 - Standard experimental design; nothing unusual.
3-4 - Very conventional; misses opportunities for deeper evaluation.
1-2 - Trivial or copied experimental design.

INSIGHTFULNESS (1-10)
How deep and thoughtful is the analysis of the experimental results?
9-10 - Rich analysis connecting results to algorithmic mechanisms; identifies failure modes and proposes explana-
tions.
7-8 - Good analysis with meaningful observations.
5-6 - Adequate analysis; mostly describes results without deeper interpretation.
3-4 - Shallow analysis; mostly just reports numbers.
1-2 - No meaningful analysis; results are presented without any interpretation.

SIGNIFICANCE (1-10)
Based on the experimental results, how significant is the algorithm’s demonstrated contribution to the field?
9-10 - Results demonstrate substantial improvements over baselines with clear statistical significance.
7-8 - Meaningful improvements demonstrated across most metrics/datasets.
5-6 - Modest improvements; results are mixed across conditions.
3-4 - Negligible improvements; algorithm barely outperforms baselines.
                                                                                                                         53



1-2 - Algorithm underperforms baselines; results are negative.

[NEW] EXPERIMENTAL EFFECTIVENESS (1-10)
Does the experimental evidence actually support or meaningfully test the algorithm’s claims? This dimension
evaluates the Claim-to-Evidence loop: whether the experiments produce results that constitute genuine evidence
(positive or negative) for the algorithm’s stated contributions.
NOTE: Honestly reporting negative results (algorithm underperforms) is NOT penalized if the experimental
design was sound and the analysis is insightful. What matters is whether the experiments were designed to TEST
the claims and whether the results INFORM the reader about the claims’ validity.
9-10 - Every major claim has direct experimental evidence; results clearly confirm or refute each claim with
appropriate metrics and baselines; ablation studies isolate individual contributions.
7-8 - Most claims are supported by experimental evidence; one or two claims lack direct evidence; overall the
experiments convincingly test the core contribution.
5-6 - Some claims have supporting evidence but others are tested only indirectly or with insufficient baselines;
the evidence-claim mapping is partial.
3-4 - Weak connection between claims and evidence; experiments run but results do not clearly inform any
specific claim; generic benchmarking without claim focus.
1-2 - No discernible connection between the algorithm’s claims and the experimental results; experiments appear
arbitrary or disconnected from the contribution.

[NEW] WRITEUP READABILITY (1-10)
How well-structured is this experiment report for a downstream writing agent to produce the Experiments section
of a research paper? Evaluate whether the report provides all elements needed for paper writing.
Consider:
• Does the report follow a clear structure (Experimental Setup, Baselines, Metrics, Main Results, Ablation
   Studies, Analysis/Discussion)?
• Are data tables formatted with mean +/- std across runs?
• Are figures generated with proper captions, axis labels, and legends that are paper-ready?
• Is reproducibility information included (hyperparameters, seeds, compute environment)?
• Are result claims explicitly tied to specific table/figure references?
• Does the report include a clear comparison narrative (what beats what and by how much)?
• Would a writing agent be able to extract a complete Experiments + Results section?
9-10 - Excellent: Report is publication-ready; structured sections, formatted tables with mean+/-std, captioned
figures, full reproducibility info.
7-8 - Good: Most elements present; minor formatting or structural gaps.
5-6 - Moderate: Basic results present but significant gaps in formatting, tables, or figure quality for paper writing.
3-4 - Weak: Report is mainly unstructured text with inline numbers; writing agent would need major reformatting.
1-2 - Poor: No usable structure; raw output dumps or missing key sections.


HALLUCINATION CHECK
Step 1 - Hard rule (check first): If execution_artifacts = [NO DATA FILES FOUND] AND log =
[NO LOG FOUND] or log contains no execution traces (no output values, no timing, no errors): → set
has_hallucination = true, Soundness = 1-2. Do NOT let a polished report override this.
Step 2 - Soft checks (apply when Step 1 does not trigger, i.e., evidence files DO exist): IMPORTANT:
When result files exist, the bar for flagging hallucination is HIGH. Stylistic gaps, narrative imprecision, or partial
report coverage are NOT hallucination. Only flag has_hallucination = true here if:
• The KEY numerical claims in the report (e.g., "our method achieves 92% accuracy") directly contradict the
  actual values in the result files (e.g., files show 61%), OR
• The result files contain clearly synthetic/templated data (identical values across all conditions, suspiciously
  round numbers like exactly 0.5000, 1.0000 everywhere), OR
• The report claims results for datasets/baselines that are entirely absent from all files.
Do NOT flag hallucination merely because:
• The report narrative is incomplete or partially inconsistent with the experimental plan
• Some secondary metrics or ablations in the report lack corresponding files
                                                                                                          54



  • The evaluation setup differs from what the task description suggested


  INPUT
  Task Description: {task}
  Research Idea: {idea}
  Algorithm Design Report: {algorithm_report}
  Algorithm Script (code/algorithm.py summary or key excerpts): {algorithm_script}
  Experiment Report (document/experiment_report.md): {experiment_report}
  Execution Log (logs/ or log.txt, truncated if long; may show [NO LOG FOUND] if agent stored
  outputs in result files instead): {log}
  Execution Artifacts (data files / CSV results / figures generated during experiments):
  {execution_artifacts}

  OUTPUT FORMAT
  Respond with ONLY valid JSON matching this schema:
  {
      "Hallucination": {
         "has_hallucination": <true/false>,
         "details": "Evidence of fabrication or confirmation of genuine results"
      },
      "DesignSoundness":               {"score": <1-10>, "justification": "..."},
      "DesignCompleteness":            {"score": <1-10>, "justification": "..."},
      "AlgorithmExperimentAlignment": {"score": <1-10>, "justification": "..."},
      "Soundness":                     {"score": <1-10>, "justification": "..."},
      "Consistency":                   {"score": <1-10>, "justification": "..."},
      "Completeness":                  {"score": <1-10>, "justification": "..."},
      "Novelty":                       {"score": <1-10>, "justification": "..."},
      "Insightfulness":                {"score": <1-10>, "justification": "..."},
      "Significance":                  {"score": <1-10>, "justification": "..."},
      "ExperimentalEffectiveness":     {"score": <1-10>, "justification": "..."},
      "WriteupReadability":            {"score": <1-10>, "justification": "..."},
      "OverallAssessment": {
         "score": <1-10>,
         "strengths": ["...", "..."],
         "weaknesses": ["...", "..."]
      },
      "Confidence": <1-5>
  }


                               Figure 32 Prompt for judging experimental results.

B.6    Evaluation Details for Sec. 5.3.5
To evaluate the quality of the Introduction section generated by the IntroductionAgent, we compare it against
a base model (GPT-4o) baseline across three papers. For each configuration, we perform five independent runs
and report mean scores. The evaluation employs three complementary metrics, each scored on a 0-1 scale:
   • Content Coverage: measures how well the introduction captures the reference material. It is a weighted
     combination of raw weighted coverage (weight 0.34), anchor coverage for main results and theorems
     (0.18), core scientific path coverage for method and evidence chains (0.22), structure alignment for the
     problem→gap→method→evidence flow (0.26), and a survey dominance penalty (−0.04) that penalizes
     overly background-heavy introductions.
   • Faithfulness: quantifies hallucination avoidance, defined as 1 − (#unsupported claims/#total claims).
     Claims are categorized into common background (lenient), paper-specific (strict), and overclaim/specu-
                                                                                                              55


        lation (very strict) thresholds.
   • Content Quality: a rubric-based score assessing six dimensions, domain/application emphasis, algorithm
     mechanism or formula details, complete background description, core research idea clarity, explicit
     research goals/contributions, and concrete experimental or theoretical depth.

B.6.1    Generation Details
Each paper’s upstream agent outputs, including the experiment report, theoretical proof report, survey/related
work draft, and algorithm description, serve as the shared reference material from which both ReasFlow and
the baseline must compose the introduction.
ReasFlow (IntroductionAgent). The IntroductionAgent first collects structured information from all upstream
agent outputs using dedicated extraction tools that parse survey reports, method descriptions, experimental
results, and theoretical contributions into structured summaries, grounding all content in source materials
rather than relying on the LLM’s parametric knowledge. The agent then composes the introduction and
enters an automated evaluation–refinement loop: a built-in evaluation tool assesses the draft along three
quality dimensions (Coverage, Faithfulness, Content Quality), and a refinement tool performs targeted local
edits on low-scoring aspects while preserving high-quality content. This loop iterates until scores plateau or a
maximum iteration count is reached.
Baseline (GPT-4o). The baseline receives the same upstream assets, the complete set of .tex files from the
prover, experiment, survey, and algorithm agents, concatenated as context, together with a single prompt
instructing the model to write a self-contained introduction. No structured extraction, automated evaluation,
or iterative refinement is performed; the baseline produces the introduction in a single inference call.
Runs and reproducibility. For each of the three papers, five independent runs are performed for both ReasFlow
and the baseline to account for stochastic variation, and results are averaged.
Before evaluation, two preprocessing steps transform each generated introduction and its reference material
into structured representations amenable to automated scoring.
Reference Preprocessing (preprocess_refe.py): All reference .tex files from the paper (experiment reports,
theoretical proofs, related work sections) are fed to an LLM, which performs a structured decomposition
into three categories, experiment_results, prover_results, and related_work_claims. A second LLM call then
classifies each item’s importance as critical (directly supports the main conclusion), important (supports
the conclusion but is not the most central), or supplementary (minor details not essential for the introduction).
Prediction Claim Extraction (preprocess_pred.py): The generated introduction together with its bibtex file
references.bib is parsed by an LLM to extract all explicit contribution and factual statements as minimal
semantic units (prediction_claims), each classified as either a “contribution” or “fact” type. These structured
representations, the categorized reference items and the extracted prediction claims, serve as inputs to the
evaluation stage described below.

B.6.2    Evaluation Details
The evaluation proceeds in three stages.
Stage 1 (Reference Preprocessing): All reference .tex files from the paper are fed to an LLM, which extracts
three structured categories, experiment_results, prover_results, and related_work_claims, each annotated
with an importance label (critical, important, or supplementary) based on its role in supporting the
paper’s main conclusions.
Stage 2 (Claim Extraction): The generated introduction is parsed by an LLM to extract all explicit contribution
and factual statements as minimal semantic units (prediction_claims).
Stage 3 (Evaluation): Two LLM calls are made, one for joint Coverage & Faithfulness assessment, and one for
Content Quality, using the structured references and extracted claims as context.
                                                                                                                 56


Coverage scoring. The final coverage score is a weighted combination of four sub-metrics:

             Coverage = 0.34 · Craw + 0.18 · Canchor + 0.22 · Ccore + 0.26 · Cstruct − 0.04 · Psurvey ,

where Craw is the importance-and-category-weighted coverage (critical items weight 1.0, important 0.6,
supplementary 0.0; experiment results scaled ×1.15, prover results ×1.10, related work ×0.55); Canchor is the
coverage rate of anchor items (main/core results); Ccore weights only experiment and prover results to capture
the method-to-evidence chain; Cstruct measures alignment with the problem→gap→method→contribution→
evidence narrative arc; and Psurvey penalizes overly background-heavy introductions.
The complete prompts for the two evaluation calls are presented in Fig. 33 and Fig. 34.
  System Prompt for Coverage & Faithfulness Evaluation

  You are a rigorous and meticulous LLM-as-a-judge specialized in evaluating scientific introductions.
  Coverage (0.00–1.00) The proportion of reference information (experimentResults, proverResults, related-
  WorkClaims) meaningfully covered by the introduction.
  • Mark an item as covered when the introduction captures its substantive meaning, even if compressed,
    paraphrased, or merged with nearby claims.
  • Do NOT require lexical overlap or one-to-one sentence matching.
  • For method/theory/result items, a conservative summary counts as covered even if minor details are omitted.
  • Reward introductions preserving the chain: problem/background, limitation/gap, method/contribution,
    evidence preview.
  Faithfulness (0.00–1.00) Faithfulness = 1 - (unsupportedClaims / totalClaims). Classify each prediction claim
  before judging:
  1. commonBackground: standard field knowledge, faithful unless contradicted;
  2. paperSpecific: claims about method, theory, experiments, require direct support or conservative inference;
  3. overclaimOrSpeculation: mark unfaithful if contradicted, overstated, numerically unsupported, or unreasonably
     inferred.
  Output Format (JSON) Return coverage (float in [0, 1]), faithfulness (float in [0, 1]), rationale, claim-
  FaithfulnessDetails (list of claimIndex, claimText, status), and referenceCoverageDetails (experimentResults,
  proverResults, relatedWorkClaims with index, descriptionExcerpt, importance, status).


      Figure 33 System prompt for the joint Coverage & Faithfulness evaluation of generated introductions.

  System Prompt for Content Quality Evaluation

  You are a rigorous LLM-as-a-judge focusing on Content Quality. Apply strict standards.
  Content Quality (0.00–1.00) Score based on the following dimensions (lacking any dimension incurs deduc-
  tions):
  1. Domain emphasis: Does the introduction clearly identify the research/application domain?
  2. Algorithm/formula detail: Does it include key algorithmic steps or core mathematical formulas with
     correct explanations?
  3. Background completeness: Is the background coherent and sufficient to set up the subsequent content?
  4. Core idea clarity: Does it clearly present the paper’s core method and innovation?
  5. Research goals: Are research objectives and contributions explicitly stated and verifiable?
  6. Concrete depth: Does it include specific experimental settings/results or theoretical conclusions, avoiding
     vague generalities?
  Bonus criteria (should significantly raise the score if present):
  • Deep discussion of mathematical principles, model assumptions, derivations, or convergence analysis.
  • Detailed description of algorithm steps, optimization strategies, or evaluation design.
  Not scored: Literature review completeness (for reference only, not factored into contentQuality).
  Output JSON: contentQuality (float in [0,1]), rationale ("brief explanation").


            Figure 34 System prompt for the Content Quality evaluation of generated introductions.

Two composite scores are computed as weighted sums of the six sub-metrics (raw coverage, anchor coverage, core
path coverage, structure alignment, faithfulness, and content quality). The Overall Balanced score distributes
                                                                                                                                                      57


weights evenly across coverage sub-metrics (0.10 each) while giving moderate emphasis to faithfulness (0.28)
and content quality (0.32). The Overall Technical Focus score up-weights core scientific path coverage (0.15)
and content quality (0.40) to prioritize method and evidence depth over background breadth.
To assess evaluation robustness, we employ three independent evaluation models (GPT-5.4, Claude Opus, and
Gemini) and report per-judger results, each averaged over 5 independent runs. The results are summarized
in Table 20. The IntroductionAgent consistently outperforms the base model across all metrics and all
three papers. The most substantial improvement is observed in Content Quality, with an average gain of
+52.3% and a peak of +121.4% on [59](Opus judger), indicating that the agent produces introductions with
significantly richer technical depth. Faithfulness also improves on average (+7.7%), though individual judgers
vary: GPT-5.4 and Opus report large gains, while Gemini, which already assigns high faithfulness to the
base model, shows smaller margins. Notably, the improvements are most pronounced on [59], where the base
model struggles the most, suggesting that the IntroductionAgent scales better on harder papers.

Table 20 Per-paper evaluation of the IntroductionAgent vs. the base model (GPT-4o) across three evaluation models
(GPT-5.4, Claude Opus, Gemini). Each cell reports the mean over 5 independent runs. For each metric, the best
ReasFlow score and the best advantage are highlighted in bold.

                            Coverage                    Faithfulness          Content Quality           Overall Balanced       Overall Tech. Focus
 Paper    Judger
                    Base     RF        Adv.     Base       RF      Adv.    Base    RF       Adv.     Base    RF       Adv.    Base    RF       Adv.
          GPT-5.4   0.482   0.621   +28.8%      0.780     0.874   +12.1%   0.372   0.564   +51.6%    0.554   0.683   +23.2%   0.520   0.661   +27.0%
          Opus      0.354   0.677      +91.4%   0.820     0.880   +7.3%    0.320   0.620   +93.8%    0.510   0.739   +45.0%   0.461   0.708   +53.6%
 [16]
          Gemini    0.489   0.674   +37.7%      0.950     0.890   −6.3%    0.610   0.830   +36.1%    0.677   0.795   +17.3%   0.658   0.788   +19.8%
          Average   0.441   0.657   +48.8%      0.850     0.881   +3.7%    0.434   0.671   +54.7%    0.580   0.739   +27.3%   0.547   0.719   +31.6%
          GPT-5.4   0.455   0.492   +8.2%       0.766     0.942   +23.0%   0.400   0.490   +22.5%    0.552   0.642   +16.4%   0.509   0.603   +18.3%
          Opus      0.350   0.519   +48.3%      0.900     0.860   −4.4%    0.320   0.520   +62.5%    0.527   0.642   +21.6%   0.474   0.602   +27.0%
 [64]
          Gemini    0.348   0.519   +49.0%      0.978     0.950   −2.9%    0.650   0.640   −1.5%     0.656   0.705   +7.6%    0.629   0.672   +6.7%
          Average   0.384   0.510   +32.7%      0.881     0.917   +4.1%    0.457   0.550   +20.4%    0.578   0.663   +14.7%   0.538   0.625   +16.3%
          GPT-5.4   0.360   0.495   +37.4%      0.704     0.874   +24.1%   0.304   0.580   +90.8%    0.465   0.648   +39.5%   0.418   0.622   +48.8%
          Opus      0.379   0.424   +11.9%      0.770     0.928   +20.5%   0.280   0.620   +121.4%   0.482   0.657   +36.2%   0.432   0.629   +45.5%
 [59]
          Gemini    0.382   0.452   +18.4%      0.941     1.000   +6.3%    0.450   0.780   +73.3%    0.587   0.734   +24.9%   0.548   0.719   +31.3%
          Average   0.374   0.457   +22.3%      0.805     0.934   +16.0%   0.345   0.660   +91.5%    0.511   0.679   +32.9%   0.466   0.657   +40.9%
 Overall Average    0.400   0.541   +35.4%      0.845     0.911   +7.7%    0.412   0.627   +52.3%    0.557   0.694   +24.6%   0.517   0.667   +29.1%



B.7      Evaluation Details for Sec. 5.3.6
This appendix documents the full setup for the WritingAgent sub-experiment of Sec. 5.3.6: the eleven
compared systems and their configurations, the shared input bundle and task prompt, the four-phase
evaluation pipeline, the equal-weight scoring rule, the reviewer-model ensemble, and the representative
evaluation prompts. Per-dimension sub-score tables are provided at the end.

B.7.1    Generation Details
Compared Systems.        We compare the ReasFlow WritingAgent against ten baselines drawn from three
families of paper-writing systems. The first family consists of two general-purpose coding agents, Claude Code
and Codex, each run in two configurations: a plain vanilla configuration with no additional domain skills,
and an ARIS [56] configuration that augments the coding agent with a scientific-writing skill pack covering
paper-structure planning, asset integration, and a compile-then-review loop. Each of the four resulting variants
is run once under GPT-5.1 and once under GPT-5.4, giving the eight coding-agent systems in a 2 × 2 × 2
matrix. The second family is the scientific-writing agent ReasLingo, a publicly available system on the ReasLab
platform built on top of the Gemini CLI; we evaluate it twice, once with a GPT-5.1 backend and once with
GPT-5.4. Our own WritingAgent (Sec. 4.6) is run with a GPT-5.1 backend, giving eleven systems in total.
The fairness of the comparison rests on giving every one of the eleven systems exactly the same input
bundle that the ReasFlow WritingAgent itself receives when it writes [16]. This bundle consists of an asset
directory with the full upstream research artifacts (proved theorems, problem setup and algorithm pseudocode,
integrated proof report, experiment code with raw numerical outputs, main experiment report, pre-generated
                                                                                                                     58


experiment figures, literature survey, draft introduction, and reference .bib files); the target venue’s LaTeX
template, including the document class and the algorithm style dependencies needed for compilation; and the
shared task prompt (reproduced below), which describes the task, the inputs, the required deliverables, the
non-negotiable content-completeness requirements, and the compile-cleanliness criterion. The asset bundle
and the template are byte-identical across all compared systems and identical to what the WritingAgent
reads, and the task prompt is delivered verbatim as each system’s initial instruction.
Every system is then run as a black box inside its own isolated working directory and is allowed to complete
the task autonomously, producing its deliverables under a ./paper/ subdirectory. ReasLingo is the only
compared system without a local CLI; we submit the same inputs through its hosted platform and collect the
resulting main.tex, references.bib, and compiled PDF for evaluation. No system-specific tuning, prompt
engineering, or intermediate supervision is applied, and evaluation operates on whatever deliverables each
system produces when its own run terminates.
Shared Task Prompt. The task prompt below is delivered verbatim to every compared system. It is the same
prompt that the ReasFlow WritingAgent receives for [16], with no system-specific adaptation.
  Shared task prompt provided to every compared system

  You are an AI agent tasked with producing a publication-ready research paper from a bundle of paper-writing
  assets placed in your working directory. The topic, methods, theory, experimental data, and references must all
  come from the assets; do not invent anything from memory or general knowledge.
  The working directory contains two input folders. The assets directory holds the full research materials for
  the paper; begin by reading its top-level README, which is the authoritative overview of the bundle and
  maps paper sections to their source files. The template directory holds the official LaTeX template for the
  target venue, including the document class, a skeleton example file, and the algorithm style dependencies. Write
  every deliverable inside a paper subdirectory of the working directory: the master TeX file must begin with the
  template’s documentclass line, the references file must merge every bibliography file from the assets, and the
  final PDF must be produced by running latexmk on the master TeX file inside that paper subdirectory.
  The following content requirements are hard red lines and non-negotiable. Every algorithm environment in the
  assets must be preserved in the paper. Every theorem, lemma, corollary, proposition, and definition must be
  preserved in full; phrasing may be edited, but conditions, conclusions, constants, and assumptions must remain
  exact. Every proof must be preserved completely, with no "proof omitted" short-circuits; if proofs live in the
  appendix, the full version must appear there. Every number, table, and experiment figure from the assets must
  be presented faithfully, with numbers matching the raw data exactly and no fabrication or approximation. Every
  bibliography entry from the assets must be merged into the paper’s references file, and every in-text citation
  must resolve to such an entry.
  The final PDF must compile with zero LaTeX errors and zero warnings of any kind, including undefined references,
  missing citations, overfull or underfull hboxes, and font warnings. Run latexmk iteratively: after each compile,
  read the log, fix every error and every warning, and recompile until the log is clean.
  Complete the entire task in a single autonomous run. Do not pause to ask for confirmation or clarification; for
  any uncertainty, make the most reasonable default choice and continue. Do not deliver partial results.
  The paper must be written in English. Keep the author block as an anonymous placeholder and do not write any
  real names, affiliations, emails, or acknowledgements.


Figure 35 Shared task prompt delivered to all eleven compared systems, reproduced with only whitespace normalized
for typesetting.

B.7.2   Evaluation Details
Once every system has produced a manuscript, evaluation proceeds in four phases (one per reporting dimension).
All phases consume, when relevant, a common Phase 0 artifact bundle that is extracted programmatically
from each output; no phase reads another phase’s output.
Phase 0 (programmatic preparation). For every system we recursively read the content-facing asset .tex
files; reconstruct the full generated LaTeX source by following \input and \include; extract text from
the generated PDF; render representative PDF pages as JPEG images for vision input; parse the LaTeX
                                                                                                                      59


compilation log; extract citation keys from both the assets and the generated paper; and verify bibliography
entries against arXiv and CrossRef. Phase 0 records only facts (sets of keys, file lists, page counts, compile
error counts), never judgments.
Phase 1 (Faithfulness, dimension I). A reviewer model, given the assets, the baseline-generated paper, citation-
set facts, and programmatic reference/paper signals, scores five sub-dimensions on a 0–10 integer scale:
I1 theorem fidelity, I2 algorithm fidelity, I3 numerical fidelity, I4 figure fidelity, I5 citation fidelity. The reviewer
must flag every fabrication (statement with no asset source), distortion (content present in assets but altered
in the paper), and phantom citation (plausible-looking but non-existent bib entry), supported by a quoted
paper snippet as evidence.
Phase 2 (Coverage, dimension II). A reviewer model scores five sub-dimensions: II1 theorem usage, II2 algorithm
usage, II3 experiment usage, II4 figure usage, II5 citation usage. The rubric is deliberately abstract: reviewers
identify landmark references and core assets from their training knowledge together with the programmatic
signals extracted in Phase 0, without the rubric naming any paper-specific artifact. This keeps the evaluation
generalizable across papers.
Phase 3 (Writing Quality, dimension III). The reviewer is given only the generated paper and paper-side signals
(no assets), so that writing quality is judged self-referentially. The submitted references.bib is pre-filtered
to the cited subset so that systems which copy the entire source bibliography are not unfairly punished on
prompt length while a majority of entries are never actually cited. Four sub-dimensions are scored: III1 clarity,
III2 coherence (project focus), III3 argumentation, III4 evidence use.
Phase 4 (Submittability, dimension IV). Three sub-components are scored: IV1 compile, a programmatic
check of the LaTeX compile log (number of errors, undefined references, overfull/underfull hboxes, font
warnings; 10 iff all zero; 0 iff no PDF is produced); IV2 visual layout, a two-step vision pipeline in which
gemini-3.1-flash-lite-preview first produces a structured description of every PDF page (identifying
placeholders, unresolved references, empty bib fields, rendering anomalies, page-level layout issues) and then
the three reviewer models each score three visual sub-dimensions (IV2_1 layout compliance, IV2_2 rendering
integrity, IV2_3 content presentation) from those descriptions; and IV3 template compliance, a programmatic
check of the \documentclass line and of the absence of banned package families. IV1 and IV3 are binary-style
integer scores in {0, . . . , 10}; IV2 is a real-valued mean across the three visual sub-dimensions and three
reviewers.
Scoring Rule (Equal Weight at Every Level).Let Sd,k
                                                 r
                                                    denote the integer score ∈ [0, 10] given by reviewer
r ∈ {GPT-5.1, GPT-5.4, Gemini-3-Pro} to sub-dimension k of dimension d ∈ {I, II, III, IV}. Let Kd be the
number of sub-dimensions of d (KI = KII = 5, KIII = 4, KIV = 3). Equal-weight aggregation proceeds in
three steps:

                       X                           Kd
                                                   X                                                    
          S̄d,k = 13        r
                           Sd,k ,       Sd = K1d         S̄d,k ,      Overall = 41 SI + SII + SIII + SIV .
                       r                           k=1

For Phase IV, SIV is itself an equal-weight mean of D1, D2, D3 (each already an equal-weight mean over its
own components). When no PDF is produced, D1 and D2 are both set to 0 and only D3 contributes to SIV .
Reviewer Ensemble. To reduce reviewer-model bias we use three backends in parallel for every LLM-based
sub-dimension: GPT-5.1 (reviewer 1), GPT-5.4 (reviewer 2), and Gemini-3-Pro (reviewer 3). Every reviewer
receives the same prompt and returns a strict-JSON report with integer sub-scores and evidence-bearing
findings; we aggregate by straight mean. For the Phase 4 visual stage, page descriptions are produced
once by a single cheap vision describer (gemini-3.1-flash-lite-preview) and then consumed by the three
scoring reviewers, so that vision noise does not propagate through the ensemble. Prompts are designed for
cache-friendly layout: shared asset content is placed at the front of the prompt and reviewer-specific task
structure at the back, which allows the three reviewer backends to reuse their prefix cache across all eleven
compared systems.
Evaluation Prompts. Every phase shares the same prompt layout. The prompt starts with a sequence of
XML-style data blocks whose contents are filled in at run time from the Phase 0 artifacts of the system under
                                                                                                                       60


review, and the phase-specific task description, scoring rubric, and output schema come after them. Placing
the run-time data before the rubric lets the three reviewer backends reuse their prefix cache across all eleven
compared systems, since only the part after the data blocks changes between phases.
Phases 1 and 2 use the same five data blocks. The ⟨assets⟩ block carries the full source materials for the paper
under evaluation, concatenated into a single XML block by Phase 0 from the paper’s proved theorems, problem
setup and algorithm pseudocode, integrated proof report, main experiment report, and source bibliography
files. The ⟨reference_signals⟩ block carries the programmatically extracted anchor signals that Phase 0
computes directly from the assets (for example, which theorem files are declared core by the source proof
report, or which citation keys appear in the draft introduction and related-work files). The ⟨paper⟩ block
carries the manuscript produced by the system under review: Phase 0 reconstructs the full generated LaTeX
source by following the paper’s input and include statements, so that every section file appears in the block
together with the paper’s own references file. The ⟨cite_check⟩ block carries the set-operation facts that
Phase 0 computes between the source bibliography keys and the paper’s cited keys (keys cited from the source,
keys unused from the source, keys added by the paper, broken citations). The ⟨paper_signals⟩ block carries
the programmatic facts Phase 0 extracts from the paper itself, such as which figures are actually rendered
and the section-heading structure. Phase 3 uses only the ⟨paper⟩ block (with its references file filtered down
to the cited subset) and the ⟨paper_signals⟩ block, so that writing quality is judged from the manuscript
alone. Phase 4 uses two purpose-built blocks: ⟨page_descriptions⟩ carries the concatenation of per-page
structured descriptions produced by the vision stage below, and ⟨compile_facts⟩ and ⟨template_facts⟩
carry the programmatic compile-log counters and the documentclass / banned-package checks.
The phases are also distinguished by how many times each prompt is invoked. In Phases 1, 2, and 3 the prompt
is sent, for each of the eleven systems under comparison, to three reviewer backends (GPT-5.1, GPT-5.4,
Gemini-3-Pro) in parallel, giving 33 independent LLM calls per phase; the per-sub-dimension scores are
then averaged across the three reviewers with equal weight. Phase 4 is a two-stage protocol. In the first
stage, the cheap vision model gemini-3.1-flash-lite-preview is called once per rendered PDF page of
each system, producing one structured description per page (several hundred calls in total across the eleven
systems); the prompt used in this stage is shown in Fig. 39. In the second stage, those per-page descriptions
are concatenated into the ⟨page_descriptions⟩ block and the combined prompt is sent, again for each of the
eleven systems, to the same three reviewer backends in parallel for a further 33 scoring calls; the rubric used
in this stage is shown in Fig. 40. The rubric portion of each prompt, which is independent of any particular
paper and constitutes the reviewer’s actual standard of judgment, is reproduced in the LLM boxes that follow.

  Phase 1 evaluation prompt: Faithfulness (dimension I)

  Run-time data blocks (inserted at the top of the prompt before the rubric):
  <assets> ... full research materials for the paper under evaluation ... </assets> <reference_signals> ...
  programmatic anchor signals from the source assets ... </reference_signals> <paper> ... every .tex file plus the
  references file of the manuscript produced by the system under review ... </paper> <cite_check> ... citation-set
  operations between source bibliography keys and the paper’s cited keys ... </cite_check> <paper_signals> ...
  figures actually used by the paper and its section-heading structure ... </paper_signals>
  <task> You are the Faithfulness Reviewer for academic papers. Given a paper automatically generated by an AI
  system, together with the raw research assets the system had access to, judge whether every statement in the
  paper can be traced to an asset, and whether there is fabrication or distortion. Your output is a strict JSON
  report with integer scores from 0 to 10 on five sub-dimensions plus a list of findings, each supported by a quoted
  snippet from the paper as evidence; do not judge novelty, experimental design, or writing style, all of which
  belong to other reviewers. </task>
  <definition> Faithfulness means that every verifiable statement in the paper has a matching source in the assets,
  or is a clearly legitimate generation such as an architecture diagram in a Method section. Unfaithfulness takes
  three specific forms: fabrication of a claim with no asset source; distortion of content that does exist in the assets
  but is altered in the paper; and phantom citation of a plausible-looking but non-existent bibliographic entry.
  </definition>
  <rubric> The five sub-dimensions are scored independently. I1 Theorem Fidelity checks that every theorem,
  lemma, corollary, or proposition in the paper is mathematically consistent with a source in <assets>; cross-
                                                                                                                       61



directory inclusion of asset files (so the paper is not a self-contained document) is itself a defect. I2 Algorithm
Fidelity checks that the paper’s pseudocode agrees with the source algorithm on step order, loop nesting, update
rules, and communication timing. I3 Numerical Fidelity checks that every specific number in the paper (metric,
hyper-parameter, dataset size, assumption constant) is traceable to a number in the source experiment report or
algorithm specification. I4 Figure Fidelity checks that every figure used in the paper has a legitimate source,
that its caption is consistent with that source, and that it is referenced from the main text. I5 Citation Fidelity
checks that every newly added bibliography entry (those listed under added_bib_keys in <cite_check>) is a real
reference, that every citation is placed in a contextually appropriate section, and that no citation in broken_cites
is unresolved. Each sub-dimension is scored on the same 0-10 scale: 10 when fully consistent with the source; 8
or 9 for minor phrasing or symbol differences with no semantic change; 6 or 7 for one core-level issue or several
minor ones; 4 or 5 for multiple core issues; 2 or 3 when core content is fabricated or severely distorted; 0 or 1
when fabrication or mathematical errors are pervasive. </rubric>
<output_schema> Return JSON only, with per-sub-dimension integer scores and a list of findings. Every finding
must carry its severity, its location in the paper, the relevant asset reference when applicable, a short issue
description, and a quoted paper snippet as evidence; all findings of severity high or medium must be listed, while
low may be omitted. </output_schema>


                          Figure 36 Core prompt structure for Phase 1 (Faithfulness).

Phase 2 evaluation prompt: Coverage (dimension II)

Run-time data blocks (inserted at the top of the prompt before the rubric):
<assets> ... full research materials for the paper under evaluation ... </assets> <reference_signals> ...
programmatic anchor signals from the source assets ... </reference_signals> <paper> ... the manuscript
produced by the system under review ... </paper> <cite_check> ... citation-set operations between source and
paper ... </cite_check> <paper_signals> ... figures used by the paper, figures present in assets but unused,
and section-heading structure ... </paper_signals>
<task> You are the Asset Usage Judgment Reviewer. Given the input assets and the generated paper, judge
whether the paper made reasonable editorial choices about which materials to include. Reasonable usage requires
two things simultaneously: on the positive side, the core content of the source assets must be represented in the
paper; on the negative side, the paper must not indiscriminately include non-core, redundant, or debug material
as if it were important content. Your output is a strict JSON report with integer scores from 0 to 10 on five
sub-dimensions plus a list of findings. Do not judge content correctness (Phase 1), writing style (Phase 3), or
compilation and layout (Phase 4). </task>
<rubric> The five sub-dimensions each weigh the missing-core side and the junk-inclusion side independently.
II1 Theorem Usage asks whether the core theorems (those declared core in <reference_signals>) are actually
presented and whether technical lemmas are kept out of the main text rather than dumped wholesale. II2
Algorithm Usage asks whether the problem definition, assumptions, and pseudocode are all present and whether
design-rationale drafts are rewritten into the method discussion rather than pasted verbatim. II3 Experiment
Usage asks whether every standalone experiment section from the source is represented in the paper, whether
raw data tables are accompanied by analysis rather than stacked into an appendix, and whether no experiment
sections appear that are not present in the source. II4 Figure Usage asks whether the core figures identified via
<paper_signals> are used and whether debug or intermediate figures have been kept out of the main text. II5
Citation Usage asks whether foundational references for the paper’s topic are cited (reviewers identify these from
training knowledge; the rubric itself never names any specific paper) and whether the overall citation count is
reasonable. Each sub-dimension is scored on the same 0-10 scale: 10 when the core is fully covered and no junk
has accumulated; 8 or 9 for one minor omission or a couple of pieces of junk with the core still intact; 6 or 7 for
one core omission or three or more junk pieces; 4 or 5 for multiple core omissions or large-scale junk; 2 or 3 for
both widespread missing core and large-scale junk; 0 or 1 when there is almost no reasonable editorial judgment.
</rubric>
<output_schema> Return JSON only with per-sub-dimension integer scores and findings. The rubric itself
must not name any specific paper, method, or reference; reviewers identify landmarks from their own training
knowledge. </output_schema>


                           Figure 37 Core prompt structure for Phase 2 (Coverage).
                                                                                                                       62


Phase 3 evaluation prompt: Writing Quality (dimension III)

Run-time data blocks (inserted at the top of the prompt before the rubric):
<paper> ... every .tex file plus the references file, with the bib filtered to the cited subset only ... </paper>
<paper_signals> ... section-heading structure and figures actually used by the paper ... </paper_signals>
<task> You are the Writing Quality Reviewer. Judge the paper purely as academic prose, that is, language, flow,
argumentation, and integration of evidence. The assets are intentionally withheld from this phase so that writing
quality is judged self-referentially. Your output is a strict JSON report with integer scores from 0 to 10 on four
sub-dimensions plus findings with quoted evidence. Do not judge factual correctness (Phase 1), whether source
material was used correctly (Phase 2), or compilation, layout, and template compliance (Phase 4). </task>
<rubric> Four orthogonal sub-dimensions are scored independently. III1 Clarity concerns sentence form,
terminology consistency, precision, grammar, and typography at the sentence-to-paragraph level. III2 Coherence,
the emphasized sub-dimension for this project, concerns paragraph-to-paragraph and section-to-section logical
flow: whether forward and backward references resolve to real content, whether the paper has a complete narrative
arc rather than a collection of disconnected sub-papers, and whether the abstract is aligned with what the
body actually delivers. III3 Argumentation concerns whether every core claim comes with motivation, explicit
statement, supporting evidence, and closure. III4 Evidence Use concerns whether figures, tables, and citations
are integrated into the argument at the place where the reader needs them rather than left decorative. Each
sub-dimension is scored on the same 0-10 scale: 10 when the paper reads like a polished, well-edited piece of
work; 8 or 9 when it is solid with only minor non-distracting issues; 6 or 7 when it is readable but noticeably
rough; 4 or 5 when it is consistently problematic and requires effort to follow; 2 or 3 when it has widespread
problems that make it difficult to read; 0 or 1 when it is incoherent or unintelligible. </rubric>
<output_schema> Return JSON only with per-sub-dimension integer scores and findings. Every finding must
carry its severity, its location in the paper, a short issue description, and a quoted snippet as evidence.
</output_schema>


                        Figure 38 Core prompt structure for Phase 3 (Writing Quality).

Phase 4a evaluation prompt: per-page vision description (stage 1 of Submittability)

Run-time data block (a single page image is inserted, one per invocation):
<page_image> ... one rendered page of the PDF produced by the system under review ... </page_image>
<task> You analyze a single PDF page from an academic paper draft in the target venue’s format. Your job
is to identify the content and structural elements present on the page, flag visual defects that would concern
a journal editor, and emit one coarse page-level quality signal. A downstream reviewer will aggregate these
per-page analyses to score the whole PDF’s visual submittability; you focus on one page and do not infer beyond
what is visible. </task>
<context> The paper was auto-generated by an AI writing system given a LaTeX template. A journal editor
would desk-reject if the PDF contains raw LaTeX as text, uses filenames as section headings, has data dumps
replacing prose, or has non-English content. </context>
<definition> Content types controlled enum: prose, equations, table, figure, algorithm pseudocode, code, csv
data, references, raw latex source, header only, blank. Structure elements: title, author block, abstract, section
heading, subsection heading, caption, page number, running header, footnote, reference item. Anomalies are
drawn from a controlled enum grouped into three families: layout and whitespace (text overflow, image cut off,
content cut off, mostly blank, excessive whitespace, isolated float on page, large whitespace gap, float at top
only, float at bottom only, table columns overflow, equation broken line, caption separated from float); rendering
(rendering garbage, font inconsistency, latex commands unrendered); content presentation (filename as section
heading, non-English characters, missing page number, placeholder text visible, unresolved reference, empty
bibliography fields). A four-level page flag is also emitted: clean (no anomalies), minor (one or two low-severity
anomalies), major (one severe anomaly such as whole page as raw LaTeX, filename as heading, page dominated
by csv data, or non-English content), and severe (multiple severe anomalies or the page is unreadable as a paper
page). Key distinctions to avoid false positives: typeset pseudocode is not raw latex source; natural end-of-section
or end-of-document whitespace is not a layout anomaly; a word hyphenated across a page boundary is standard
LaTeX hyphenation and not content cut off; placeholder text visible is flagged only for literal template tokens
(bibliography "Author Name" / "Author X" / "Unknown Author", body text [TODO] / XXX / FIXME / <NAME>
/ <CITE> / (cite?), and stub author patterns like "A. Author" or generic "Firstname Lastname"), and is not
                                                                                                                        63



  flagged for methodology prose describing asset sources, for math subscripts such as c1 or xi , for citation keys
  rendered as short labels, for CSIAM slots the journal fills at acceptance ("Vol. x, No. x, pp. X-Y", "doi:",
  "©20xx Global-Science Press"), or for policy-required anonymization ("Anonymous Authors", "Anonymous
  Institution"); empty bibliography fields is flagged only when an entry clearly lacks author, year, or venue, and is
  not flagged for long author lists continuing onto the next page or for "et al." abbreviations; unresolved reference
  is flagged only for "??" or "[??]" marks actually rendered where a reference should appear. </definition>
  <output_schema> Return JSON only with the fields content_type (list from the content-types enum),
  structure_elements (list from the structure-elements enum), anomalies (list from the anomalies enum, empty
  if none), anomaly_details (free text with specifics, or empty string), page_flag (one of clean, minor, major,
  severe), notable_text (any unusual literal string on the page, or empty string), and summary (one factual sentence
  of at most 150 characters). </output_schema>
  <prohibited> Do not assign a 0-10 score at this stage (only the four-level page flag is used); do not judge content
  correctness, asset usage, writing, or compile status (those are other phases); do not invent anomaly codes outside
  the enum; do not add any text outside the JSON. </prohibited>


Figure 39     Stage 1 of Phase 4: per-page structured description produced by a cheap vision model
(gemini-3.1-flash-lite-preview), invoked once per page of each system’s rendered PDF.

  Phase 4b evaluation prompt: visual scoring (stage 2 of Submittability)

  Run-time data blocks (inserted at the top of the prompt before the rubric):
  <page_descriptions> ... concatenation of every per-page JSON produced by stage 1, in page order ...
  </page_descriptions> <compile_facts> ... IV1 counters extracted programmatically from the compile log:
  number of errors, undefined references, overfull and underfull hboxes, font warnings ... </compile_facts>
  <template_facts> ... IV3 checks: the documentclass line of main.tex and the presence or absence of banned
  package families ... </template_facts>
  <task> You are the Visual Layout Quality Reviewer for stage 2 of Phase 4. Given the per-page structured
  descriptions plus the programmatic compile and template facts, simulate a journal editor’s thirty-second skim and
  score submittability on three sub-components on a 0-10 integer scale. You do not see the page images directly;
  score only from <page_descriptions>, and distinguish isolated issues affecting one or two pages from systemic
  issues repeated throughout the document, weighting the latter more heavily. </task>
  <rubric> IV1 Compile is a programmatic score derived from <compile_facts>: 10 iff every counter is zero, 0 iff
  no PDF was produced at all, and intermediate values degrade with the counter totals. IV2 Visual Layout is the
  LLM-scored component and is decomposed into three axes. IV2_1 Layout Compliance covers margins, overflow,
  whitespace distribution, and float positioning (with signals text overflow, image cut off, excessive whitespace,
  isolated float on page, large whitespace gap, float at top or bottom only, table columns overflow, equation broken
  across lines, caption separated from float, mostly blank, missing page number). IV2_2 Rendering Integrity covers
  whether content is rendered as intended (signals latex commands unrendered and non-English characters are
  both critical and cap IV2_2 sharply, rendering garbage is critical, font inconsistency is a minor deduction). IV2_3
  Content Presentation covers whether the PDF reads as an academic paper rather than a compilation artifact
  (critical signals filename as section heading, placeholder text visible, unresolved reference, empty bibliography
  fields; caps also apply when csv data dominates pages, when the abstract is missing on page 1, or when there is
  no references section at the end). Each IV2 sub-axis uses the same 0-10 scale: 10 when the axis is essentially
  flawless; 8 or 9 when one or two isolated issues appear with no systemic pattern; 6 or 7 for noticeable but
  localized problems; 4 or 5 for widespread problems or multiple critical defects; 2 or 3 for systemic severe issues; 0
  or 1 when the axis catastrophically fails. IV3 Template is a programmatic score from <template_facts>: 10
  iff the documentclass matches the target template and no banned packages are used. The aggregation is equal
  weight: the final IV2 is the mean over IV2_1, IV2_2, IV2_3 and over the three reviewer models, and the final IV
  submittability score is the mean of IV1, IV2, and IV3; when no PDF is produced, IV1 and IV2 are both set to 0
  and only IV3 contributes. </rubric>
  <output_schema> Return JSON only with per-sub-component integer scores, a per-page count summary (total
  pages and counts of clean, minor, major, severe pages), and findings that cite specific page numbers and quote
  short excerpts from <page_descriptions> as evidence. </output_schema>


Figure 40 Stage 2 of Phase 4: the three reviewer backends (GPT-5.1, GPT-5.4, Gemini-3-Pro) score visual submittability
from the stage-1 page descriptions and the programmatic compile and template facts.
                                                                                                                   64


Per-Dimension Sub-Score Tables. Tables 21–24 report the sub-dimension breakdown underlying Table 7.
Every entry is already averaged across the three reviewer models with equal weight; the rightmost column
reproduces the dimension score from the main table.

Table 21 Phase 1 (Faithfulness) sub-dimension scores. I1 theorem, I2 algorithm, I3 numerical, I4 figure, I5 citation
fidelity.

              System                                      I1       I2      I3      I4      I5       I
              ReasFlow WritingAgent (GPT-5.1)           10.00    10.00    9.00   10.00    9.67     9.73
              Claude Code + ARIS (GPT-5.4)               7.67     9.33    9.67   10.00    8.67     9.07
              Claude Code + ARIS (GPT-5.1)               4.67    10.00    8.33    8.00    7.33     7.67
              Claude Code, vanilla (GPT-5.1)             4.67     7.33    8.67    8.67    10.00    7.87
              Claude Code, vanilla (GPT-5.4)             9.33    10.00    4.33    7.33    10.00    8.20
              Codex + ARIS (GPT-5.1)                     4.67    10.00    5.67    9.67    8.00     7.60
              Codex + ARIS (GPT-5.4)                     6.67    10.00    8.67    9.00    8.00     8.47
              Codex, vanilla (GPT-5.1)                   4.67     9.33    8.00    8.00    8.33     7.67
              Codex, vanilla (GPT-5.4)                   5.00     9.33    4.00    8.33    5.67     6.47
              ReasLingo (GPT-5.1)                        5.00    10.00    9.33    9.33    8.67     8.47
              ReasLingo (GPT-5.4)                        8.00    10.00    8.00    8.67    7.67     8.47


Table 22 Phase 2 (Coverage) sub-dimension scores. II1 theorem, II2 algorithm, II3 experiment, II4 figure, II5 citation
usage.

                System                                    II1     II2     II3     II4     II5      II
                ReasFlow WritingAgent (GPT-5.1)           8.67   9.33    10.00   10.00    9.33    9.47
                Claude Code + ARIS (GPT-5.4)              5.00   6.33    10.00   10.00    9.33    8.13
                Claude Code + ARIS (GPT-5.1)              4.67   7.67    5.33     6.33    7.67    6.33
                Claude Code, vanilla (GPT-5.1)            4.67   8.00    7.33     7.00    9.00    7.20
                Claude Code, vanilla (GPT-5.4)            9.33   9.33    8.33    10.00    8.67    9.13
                Codex + ARIS (GPT-5.1)                    5.00   8.00    9.67     9.00    8.67    8.07
                Codex + ARIS (GPT-5.4)                    3.67   6.00    2.67     4.00    5.33    4.33
                Codex, vanilla (GPT-5.1)                  4.33   8.00    2.67     6.67    6.67    5.67
                Codex, vanilla (GPT-5.4)                  3.33   6.00    3.33     8.67    5.33    5.33
                ReasLingo (GPT-5.1)                       6.00   8.67    8.33     7.00    8.00    7.60
                ReasLingo (GPT-5.4)                       3.67   6.00    2.67     4.33    7.33    4.80

Discussion.    The sub-score tables above indicate that faithfulness alone is not discriminative enough to
separate the compared systems. Most systems receive an I2 algorithm-fidelity score of at least 9.33, because
the task prompt explicitly marks algorithm pseudocode as a hard red line and nearly every system copies the
pseudocode correctly; faithfulness differentiates the compared systems mainly on I1 theorem fidelity, where
WritingAgent scores 10.00 against a median of about 5.00 for baselines that drop most theorems, and on I3
numerical fidelity, where systems that copy numbers carefully separate from systems that round aggressively
or regenerate.
Coverage is where the overall ranking is mostly decided. The six systems at the bottom of the overall table
all have II Coverage no higher than 6, typically because they drop entire experiment sections or leave out
parts of the algorithm specification; in contrast, systems that place above this threshold all cover the core
experiments and algorithm ingredients, and the remaining gap between them is accounted for by writing
quality and submittability.
Submittability finally exposes failure modes that Phases I to III cannot see. Two systems with otherwise
reasonable content scores, Claude Code + ARIS under GPT-5.1 and Claude Code, vanilla under GPT-5.1, fall
to the bottom because of compilation or rendering failure: the former fails to produce a PDF at all because
                                                                                                           65


Chinese characters leak into the source and break the compile, while the latter compiles but accumulates
45 errors, 19 undefined citations, and 13 overfull hboxes. Such failures are invisible from the content-facing
phases, yet they decisively determine whether the manuscript could actually be submitted, which is why the
overall score is an equal-weight mean across all four dimensions rather than a weighted combination that
could conceal them.

C   Unpolished ReasFlow-Generated Manuscripts
The following pages reproduce the unpolished ReasFlow-generated manuscripts for the five case studies, in
the order FedSLoP, Subspace SCAFFOLD, SUDA-Muon, MC-ADSGD, and Retraction-free EXTRA. These
manuscripts preceded the human-expert polishing reflected in the arXiv papers cited in the main text.
CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math.                                              Vol. x, No. x, pp. 1-31
doi:                                                                  xx 20xx




FedSLoP: Memory-Efficient Federated Learning
with Low-Rank Gradient Projection
ReasFlow Paper Copilot


          Abstract. Federated learning enables a population of clients to collaboratively train
          machine learning models without exchanging their raw data, but standard algorithms
          such as FedAvg suffer from slow convergence and high communication and memory
          costs in heterogeneous, resource-constrained environments. We introduce FedSLoP,
          a federated optimization algorithm that combines momentum with low-rank random
          subspace projections of stochastic gradients, thereby reducing the dimension of com-
          municated and stored updates while preserving optimization progress. On the the-
          oretical side, we develop a detailed nonconvex convergence analysis under standard
          smoothness and bounded-variance assumptions. For the full-participation setting, we
          prove an explicit O(1/T ) convergence rate in terms of the averaged squared gradient
          norm, with a stochastic variance floor that exhibits linear speedup in the number of
          clients and explicit dependence on the subspace rank and momentum parameters. We
          further derive an optimized harmonic step-size strategy that attains an essentially op-
          timal trade-off between optimization, variance, and drift terms in the presence of low-
          rank projections. On the empirical side, we conduct extensive experiments on feder-
          ated MNIST classification with heterogeneous data partitions, showing that FedSLoP
          substantially reduces communication volume and client-side memory while achiev-
          ing competitive or better accuracy compared with FedAvg and representative sparse
          or low-rank baselines. Together, our results demonstrate that random subspace mo-
          mentum methods such as FedSLoP provide a principled and effective approach to
          communication- and memory-efficient federated learning.
AMS subject classifications: 68T07, 90C25
Key words: Federated Learning, Communication Efficiency, Low-Rank Projection, Gradient
Compression



1 Introduction
Federated learning (FL) enables collaborative model training across many edge clients
without centralizing raw data, offering a principled way to respect privacy and band-
width constraints. In cross-device deployments, the Federated Averaging (FedAvg) al-
gorithm has emerged as the de facto workhorse, but its standard instantiations do not
explicitly account for the tight memory and compute budgets of resource-constrained


http://www.global-sci.org/csiam-am                  1                   ©20xx Global-Science Press
2                             ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-31


clients. This paper introduces FedSLoP, a FedAvg-style method that incorporates ran-
dom subspace optimization and momentum to reduce client-side memory usage while
maintaining compatibility with existing FL workflows.
     In the canonical cross-device FL setting, a central server repeatedly broadcasts a
global model to a subset of clients, each client performs several local stochastic gradi-
ent steps on its private data, and the server averages the resulting model updates to form
the next global iterate. This Federated Averaging (FedAvg) procedure is attractive due to
its simplicity and communication efficiency, yet its behavior deteriorates in realistic envi-
ronments with heterogeneous (non-IID) data and partial client participation, where local
models can drift away from the global optimum and slow overall convergence. Existing
theoretical analyses of FedAvg and its variants often require restrictive conditions—such
as decaying step sizes or strong assumptions on the data distribution—to establish con-
vergence guarantees, and typically focus on statistical efficiency rather than system-level
considerations such as client memory usage. At the same time, edge devices participat-
ing in FL frequently operate under tight memory and compute constraints, making the
storage of full-dimensional optimizer states and intermediate activations a significant
bottleneck in practice.
     A rich line of foundational FL algorithms builds upon FedAvg to mitigate client drift
and improve convergence under data heterogeneity. FedProx augments local objectives
with a proximal term that penalizes deviations from the current global model, stabilizing
local updates at the cost of more complex local subproblems. SCAFFOLD introduces per-
client and server-side control variates to correct client drift and can attain convergence
behavior comparable to centralized SGD even under strong heterogeneity and partial
participation [13]. Subsequent work develops unified convergence analyses of FedAvg
and its momentum variants, proving linear speedup in the number of clients and relaxing
bounded-gradient assumptions in both convex and nonconvex regimes [4, 15, 21, 25, 35].
These results provide guidance on step-size and local step choices but largely abstract
away the system-level constraints of cross-device FL, including the memory footprint of
optimizer states, auxiliary control variables, and per-iteration activations on clients.
     In parallel, a substantial body of work has focused on communication-efficient dis-
tributed and federated optimization, employing gradient quantization, sparsification,
low-rank compression, and error-feedback mechanisms to reduce the number of trans-
mitted bits. Unbiased compressors such as QSGD [1] and biased schemes includ-
ing Top-k sparsification or sign-based updates are often combined with error-feedback
frameworks that provably recover convergence rates comparable to uncompressed
SGD [3, 11, 14, 20, 23, 24]. Integrated methods like Qsparse-local-SGD blend local updates
with aggressive compression to match the convergence of standard distributed SGD in
smooth nonconvex settings [2, 5, 8, 9]. While highly effective at saving communication,
these approaches typically keep the optimizer state full-dimensional and are thus not
tailored to reduce the client-side memory footprint, especially for modern deep models
where momentum buffers and auxiliary variables can dominate memory consumption.
     A third strand of research studies subspace and low-rank optimization, primarily in
ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-31                             3


centralized training. Recent methods show that optimization trajectories for large mod-
els often lie in low-dimensional subspaces, and exploit this structure to reduce optimizer
memory by updating only within carefully chosen subspaces while maintaining stan-
dard convergence guarantees [10]. Related work on efficient subspace algorithms for
federated learning suggests that structured projections can be leveraged to cope with
data heterogeneity while controlling complexity [41]. However, most existing subspace
approaches are not explicitly designed for the client–server architecture and participation
patterns of cross-device FL, and their implications for client memory usage, especially in
the presence of momentum and multiple local steps, remain underexplored.
     These strands of work highlight a persistent gap between algorithmic and system-
level considerations in federated learning. Foundational FL methods refine the optimiza-
tion dynamics of FedAvg to handle heterogeneity but often increase client-side state (e.g.,
control variates or proximal auxiliary variables), while communication-efficient methods
significantly reduce transmitted bits without shrinking the dimensionality of optimizer
states. Subspace optimization, in turn, offers a promising avenue for reducing mem-
ory but has not been systematically integrated into standard FedAvg-style workflows in
realistic cross-device FL settings. Consequently, we lack FL algorithms that are simul-
taneously memory-efficient on clients, theoretically grounded under realistic stochastic
conditions, and compatible with the simplicity and robustness that have made FedAvg
the default choice in many applications.
     FedSLoP is designed to bridge this gap by combining FedAvg-style training with
random subspace optimization and momentum in a way that explicitly targets client-
side memory efficiency. Unlike SCAFFOLD and related variance-reduction methods that
maintain additional per-parameter control variates on clients [13], FedSLoP constrains
both stochastic gradients and momentum to a random rank-r subspace that is shared
within each communication round. This design reduces the effective dimensionality of
the optimization trajectory and the associated optimizer states, while preserving the stan-
dard pattern of broadcasting a global model, running local updates, and averaging model
deltas. At the same time, our convergence analysis in the nonconvex regime, under ran-
dom Stiefel projectors, makes explicit how the convergence rate depends on the subspace
ratio δ = r/d and the number of clients, thereby quantifying the trade-offs induced by
low-dimensional random projections in federated learning.
     Concretely, in each communication round t the server samples a random orthonor-
mal basis Pt from the Stiefel manifold St(d,r ), forms the rank-r projector Πt = Pt Pt⊤ , and
broadcasts the pair (θ t ,Pt ) to the participating clients. Each selected client i initializes
its local model at θi,0 = θ t and performs τ local steps of SGD with momentum, but both
the stochastic gradients and momentum are restricted to the shared subspace: given a
stochastic gradient gi,s = ∇ Fi (θi,s ;ξ i,s ), the momentum is updated as vi,s+1 = µvi,s + Πt gi,s
and the model is updated as θi,s+1 = θi,s − η vi,s+1 . After completing the local loop, the
client returns the full-model delta ∆it = θi,τ − θ t , and the server performs simple averaging
θ t+1 = θ t + |S1t | ∑i∈St ∆it . By construction, when r = d the projection Πt becomes the identity,
and FedSLoP reduces exactly to standard FedAvg with momentum, providing a natural
4                            ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-31


sanity check in both the theoretical analysis and empirical evaluation.
     By constraining all local updates to a random low-dimensional subspace with ratio
δ = r/d, FedSLoP reduces the effective dimensionality of both the optimization trajec-
tory and the optimizer state on each client. Clients maintain only a single momentum
vector updated through the projector, without any per-parameter auxiliary variables or
control variates, resulting in an inherently memory-efficient approach that is particu-
larly attractive for resource-constrained devices. At the same time, the algorithm retains
the core FedAvg workflow—periodic broadcast, local computation, and model averag-
ing—ensuring that it can be integrated into existing FL systems with minimal engineer-
ing changes while explicitly encoding low-dimensional structure in the training dynam-
ics.
     On the theoretical side, we establish a nonconvex convergence analysis of FedSLoP
under full client participation and random Stiefel projectors. Under standard smoothness
and bounded variance assumptions, and explicit step-size conditions that depend on the
momentum parameter µ, the number of local steps τ, and the subspace ratio δ = r/d, we
show that the averaged squared gradient norm admits an explicit convergence bound
with an optimization term decaying as O(1/T ) and a stochastic variance term decay-
ing as O( T −1/2 ), with explicit dependence on the number of clients N. The resulting
bounds exhibit linear speedup in N through a variance term of the form σL2 /N, and their
explicit dependence on δ quantifies how restricting updates to low-dimensional random
subspaces impacts stochastic noise and convergence behavior. These results demonstrate
that incorporating random subspace constraints into FedAvg-style training need not de-
teriorate the convergence order, while making the algorithmic trade-offs between mem-
ory savings and optimization fidelity transparent.
     Empirically, we evaluate FedSLoP on a federated MNIST classification task, compar-
ing it against standard FedAvg with momentum and several sparse or partial-update
baselines on a Dirichlet non-IID split. Under a unified training budget of 100 communi-
cation rounds and a shared learning rate, FedAvg with momentum achieves the highest
final test accuracy, while FedSLoP attains a very close final accuracy and clearly out-
performs sparse or partial-update methods such as FedMef, NeuLite, and FederatedSe-
lect. These observations support the view that FedSLoP is a practical, memory-conscious
variant of FedAvg that preserves competitive predictive performance while offering a
favorable trade-off between performance and structural efficiency in realistic federated
settings.
     In summary, this work contributes a memory-efficient, theoretically grounded, and
empirically validated variant of FedAvg that operates in random low-dimensional sub-
spaces while preserving the standard cross-device FL workflow. Our design explicitly
targets client-side memory constraints without introducing complex auxiliary states, and
our analysis and experiments jointly characterize the trade-offs between subspace dimen-
sion, convergence, and communication in federated optimization.

    • FedAvg-style random subspace algorithm with momentum. We introduce Fed-
ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-31                    5


      SLoP, a variant of FedAvg that constrains local optimization to a random rank-r
      subspace shared within each round via projectors sampled from the Stiefel man-
      ifold. The method keeps the standard pattern of broadcasting the global model,
      running local SGD with momentum, and averaging model deltas, but applies the
      projector to both gradients and momentum on each client. This design eliminates
      the need for additional per-parameter states such as control variates, thereby re-
      ducing the dimensionality of optimizer states while preserving the simplicity and
      robustness of FedAvg-style training.

    • Nonconvex convergence analysis under random Stiefel projectors. We provide a
      detailed nonconvex convergence analysis of FedSLoP in the full-participation set-
      ting, assuming smooth objectives and bounded stochastic gradient variance. The
      resulting bound on the averaged squared gradient norm has an optimization term
      of order O(1/T ) and a variance-dominated term of order O( T −1/2 ), with explicit
      constants that depend on the momentum parameter, the number of local steps, the
      subspace ratio δ = r/d, and the number of clients. In particular, the bounds exhibit
      linear speedup in the number of clients through a variance term proportional to
      σL2 /N, and show that constraining updates to low-dimensional random subspaces
      does not change the convergence order.

    • Empirical validation of memory- and communication-friendly design. Through
      experiments on federated MNIST classification under a Dirichlet non-IID split,
      we compare FedSLoP to standard FedAvg with momentum and several sparse or
      partial-update baselines across a unified training budget. FedAvg with momentum
      achieves the highest final test accuracy, while FedSLoP reaches a very close final
      accuracy and maintains a consistent advantage over FedMef, NeuLite, and Feder-
      atedSelect, indicating that its memory-efficient, low-rank design offers a favorable
      trade-off between performance and resource usage in federated optimization.


2    Related Work
Federated learning (FL) has emerged as a pivotal paradigm for training models on decen-
tralized data. The foundational Federated Averaging (FedAvg) algorithm established the
standard workflow of periodic local updates and server aggregation. However, its per-
formance under realistic data heterogeneity (non-IID data) poses significant challenges,
including client drift and slow convergence [15]. To address these issues, algorithmic
extensions like FedProx and SCAFFOLD were introduced, with the latter using control
variates to correct for client drift and achieve convergence rates matching centralized
SGD under extreme heterogeneity [13]. Theoretical analyses have been crucial, proving
that linear speedup in the number of clients is achievable for FedAvg even under simulta-
neous non-IID data and partial participation [21, 35]. Further analysis in overparameter-
ized neural networks suggests that the impact of heterogeneity diminishes with increased
6                            ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-31


model width [12], while a non-parametric view quantifies the benefits of federation un-
der model and covariate shift [25]. Systems challenges like non-uniform client participa-
tion have also been addressed, with methods proposed to correct participation bias [33]
and handle computational heterogeneity by allowing lightweight local updates [39]. For
composite objectives with non-smooth regularizers, primal–dual frameworks like Feder-
ated Dual Averaging [37] and algorithms like FedCanon [42] and FedDR [29] have been
developed, though their guarantees often involve residual errors or restrictive assump-
tions [40]. Personalization is a key direction to handle heterogeneity, with meta-learning
approaches like Per-FedAvg [22] and distillation-based frameworks [30,32]. Other strate-
gies include feature-alignment models [36] and decentralized personalized methods [19].
However, these methods often incur communication and memory overheads for main-
taining personalized components, and their robustness under severe system constraints
requires further investigation.
    Reducing communication overhead is essential for scalable FL. Decentralized opti-
mization protocols offer an alternative to centralized servers, enabling peer-to-peer com-
munication. While basic methods like D-PSGD suffer from non-vanishing error under
data heterogeneity, variance-reduced extensions like D2 achieve rates matching central-
ized SGD [27]. A key insight is that removing data heterogeneity influence enhances
the dependence on network topology [38], and gradient tracking can provide network-
agnostic performance under certain conditions [34]. Gradient compression techniques
are fundamental, and can be categorized into unbiased and biased (contractive) com-
pressors [11]. Algorithm-agnostic lower bounds establish fundamental performance
limits for distributed optimization with compression [8]. To counteract compression
errors, error-feedback mechanisms like EF21 are critical, preserving convergence even
with biased compressors [14, 24]. Momentum integration further helps mitigate variance
from heterogeneity [4]. For practical FL integration, frameworks like Qsparse-local-SGD
unify local SGD with sparsification and quantization [2], while double-pass compression
schemes like DoubleSqueeze apply error compensation to both upload and download
directions [28]. Asynchronous decentralized protocols can also alleviate synchronization
bottlenecks [16]. Adaptive compression strategies and near-optimal algorithms like ADI-
ANA and NEOLITHIC have been developed to approach theoretical lower bounds [8, 9].
However, these advanced methods often assume strong convexity or rely on unknown
problem constants, limiting their practical deployment in heterogeneous, non-convex FL
settings. Other notable compression schemes include sparsification with memory [23],
unified biased compression frameworks [3], quantization methods like QSGD [1], low-
rank compression like PowerSGD [31], and accelerated error-compensated methods [20].
Primal–dual methods also unify local training with unbiased compression [5].
    Memory constraints on client devices necessitate efficient management of optimizer
states and activations. Memory-efficient optimizer design often exploits low-dimensional
structure. Methods like GaLore perform training in a low-rank subspace to reduce state
memory, while recent work on GoLore provides robust subspace optimization schemes
with convergence guarantees under stochastic noise [10]. Related subspace algorithms
ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-31                      7


for federated learning suggest that structured projections can be leveraged to cope with
data heterogeneity while controlling complexity [41]. These ideas connect to geometric
convergence theory for preconditioned iterations [18] and have been applied in FL with
local matrix orthogonalization [17]. Strategies to reduce activation and optimizer-state
overhead include gradient checkpointing and parameter-efficient fine-tuning, while ar-
chitectural innovations like the efficient mixture-of-experts design in DeepSeek-V2 also
contribute to system economy [6]. A critical challenge is the integrated co-design of mem-
ory and communication efficiency. This can involve compressing optimizer states, lever-
aging asynchronous decentralized training to reduce synchronization peaks [16], and
employing dynamic topology management. Algorithms like AL-DSGD weight neigh-
bors based on performance [7], while methods like TELEPORTATION activate only a
subset of nodes [26]. The theoretical limits of such integrated systems, particularly un-
der joint memory and communication constraints, remain an open area, highlighting the
need for holistic designs that balance resource efficiency with convergence guarantees in
heterogeneous environments.
    Against this backdrop, FedSLoP sits at the intersection of federated optimization,
communication compression, and memory-efficient training. By constraining stochas-
tic gradients and momentum updates to random low-dimensional subspaces while pre-
serving the standard FedAvg workflow, it directly targets the optimizer-state memory
footprint on clients without introducing complex control variates or personalized heads.
Our theoretical analysis builds on ideas from subspace optimization and compressed dis-
tributed SGD, but tailors them to the specific structure of random Stiefel projectors in FL,
while our experiments connect these guarantees to practical gains in communication and
memory usage on non-IID MNIST.


3     Method
Building on the problem formulation and motivation in Section 1, we now present the
FedSLoP algorithm in detail. We first formalize the federated optimization problem and
introduce the random low-rank subspace model used by our method, then describe the
server and client updates, and finally discuss the memory and communication implica-
tions of the design.

3.1   Federated Optimization with Random Subspaces
We consider a standard cross-device federated learning setup with N clients. The global
optimization problem is
                                             1 N
                                min f (θ ) := ∑ Fi (θ ),                           (3.1)
                               θ ∈ Rd        N i =1
where Fi is the local empirical risk on client i. At each communication round t, the server
maintains a global model θ t ∈ Rd and coordinates local updates executed on a subset (or
8                             ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-31


all) of the clients. Our analysis in Section 4 focuses on the full-participation case, where
all N clients participate in every communication round; extending the theory to partial
participation is an interesting direction for future work.
    A key ingredient of FedSLoP is a random low-rank subspace model applied to
stochastic gradients and momentum. Let r ≤ d be a target rank, and define the Stiefel
manifold
                              St(d,r ) := { P ∈ Rd×r : P⊤ P = Ir },
whose elements are column-orthonormal matrices. At the beginning of each communi-
cation round t, the server samples a random matrix Pt ∈ St(d,r ) from the uniform (Haar)
distribution and forms the rank-r projector

                                     Πt := Pt Pt⊤ ∈ Rd×d .                                    (3.2)

We denote the subspace ratio by
                                             r
                                         δ := ∈ (0,1],                               (3.3)
                                             d
which will play a central role in the convergence analysis in Section 4.
    Intuitively, Πt selects a different random r-dimensional subspace at each communi-
cation round and restricts all local optimization steps to this subspace, while the model
itself remains full-dimensional. When r = d, the projector reduces to the identity and
FedSLoP collapses to standard FedAvg with momentum; when r ≪ d, the updates are
effectively low-rank, dramatically reducing the dimensionality of the optimizer state and
communicated directions.

3.2   FedSLoP with Full Participation
Algorithm 1 summarizes the core variant of FedSLoP analyzed in Section 4, specialized
to full client participation and per-round zero-initialized momentum.
    The algorithm follows the FedAvg template: the server repeatedly broadcasts the cur-
rent global model, clients perform several local stochastic-gradient steps, and the server
averages the resulting model deltas. The main difference is the use of the random projec-
tor Πt inside the local momentum update, which constrains the effective update direc-
tions to a low-dimensional subspace shared across all clients within round t. This design
enables memory-efficient implementations in which only projected gradients and mo-
mentum need to be stored and communicated, while the full model parameters reside in
standard dense tensors.

3.3   Memory and Communication Considerations
The random subspace design in Algorithm 1 has several concrete implications for system
resources:
ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-31                     9


Algorithm 1 FedSLoP with Full Participation
 1: Input: number of rounds T, local steps τ, stepsize η > 0, momentum parameter µ ∈
    [0,1), rank r, number of clients N.
 2: Server initializes: global model θ 0 ∈ Rd .
 3: for each communication round t = 0,1,...,T − 1 do
 4:     Sample Pt ∼ Unif(St(d,r )) and set Πt = Pt Pt⊤ .
 5:     Broadcast (θ t ,Pt ) (or equivalently Πt ) to all clients i ∈ {1,..., N }.
 6:     for each client i = 1,..., N in parallel do
 7:         ∆it ← C LIENT U PDATE (i,θ t ,Πt ).
 8:     end for
 9:     Aggregate updates and set

                                                           1 N t
                                                           N i∑
                                          θ t +1 ← θ t +         ∆i .
                                                              =1

10: end for
11: Output: final global model θ T .


12: procedure C LIENT U PDATE (i, θ t , Πt )
13: Initialize local model θi,0 ← θ t and local momentum vi,0 ← 0.
14: for local step s = 0,1,...,τ − 1 do
15:    Sample a minibatch ξ i,s from client i.
16:    Compute stochastic gradient gi,s ← ∇ Fi (θi,s ;ξ i,s ).
17:    Update momentum (projected) vi,s+1 ← µvi,s + Πt gi,s .
18:    Update local model θi,s+1 ← θi,s − η vi,s+1 .
19: end for
20: return ∆it ← θi,τ − θ t .


Optimizer-state memory. In standard FedAvg with momentum, each client typically
maintains a full-dimensional momentum buffer of size d, in addition to the model pa-
rameters themselves. In FedSLoP, the momentum vector vi,s is updated using projected
gradients Πt gi,s , so it can be stored and manipulated in the same d-dimensional space
but its effective degrees of freedom are restricted to the r-dimensional subspace spanned
by Pt . In practical implementations that exploit this structure, clients can store the mo-
mentum in factored form vi,s = Pt wi,s with wi,s ∈ Rr , reducing the optimizer-state memory
from O(d) to O(r ) per linear layer. When r ≪ d, this yields substantial savings for deep
models.

Communication cost. On the downlink, the server must transmit the projector infor-
mation in addition to the model parameters. However, Pt can be generated from shared
random seeds or low-precision parameters, and its cost is amortized across all clients
10                              ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-31


within a round. On the uplink, clients send full-model deltas ∆it , but these deltas arise
from low-rank projected updates, meaning that their information content is effectively
confined to an r-dimensional subspace. In practice, this structure can be combined with
standard compression (e.g., low-rank factorization per layer) to reduce transmitted bits
without altering the theoretical analysis in Section 4.

Compatibility with standard FL workflows. When the rank is set to r = d, the projec-
tor Πt equals the identity and Algorithm 1 reduces to FedAvg with client-side momen-
tum. Thus FedSLoP can be viewed as a strict generalization of FedAvg that introduces a
tunable subspace ratio δ controlling the trade-off between memory/communication and
convergence accuracy. This perspective is particularly useful when interpreting the con-
vergence bounds in Theorem 4.1, where δ appears explicitly in both the optimization and
variance terms.
    In the next section we formalize the assumptions underlying our analysis and de-
velop a detailed nonconvex convergence theory for Algorithm 1.


4 Theory
In this section we develop a detailed nonconvex convergence analysis of FedSLoP in
the full-participation setting described in Section 3. We first state the smoothness and
stochastic-gradient assumptions, then introduce the random subspace model and key
auxiliary quantities, and finally present the main convergence theorem together with the
supporting lemmas and corollaries. All proofs are provided in full.

4.1   Assumptions and Random Subspace Model
We recall the standard smoothness and bounded-variance assumptions.

Assumption 1 (Smoothness and lower boundedness). The global objective function f
in (3.1) is bounded below by f ∗ > −∞. The global function f and each local function Fi
are L-smooth, i.e., their gradients are L-Lipschitz continuous.

Assumption 2 (Stochastic gradient properties). For each client i and model θ, the stochas-
tic gradient gi (θ ) computed from a minibatch is an unbiased estimator
                                                                               of the true local
gradient, E[ gi (θ )] = ∇ Fi (θ ). The local variance is bounded as E ∥ gi (θ )−∇ Fi (θ )∥2 ≤ σL2 ,
and the gradient heterogeneity across clients is bounded as ∥∇ Fi (θ )−∇ f (θ )∥2 ≤ σG2 .

    In addition, FedSLoP uses the random projector Πt defined in (3.2). Throughout this
section we assume that Pt is drawn independently from the Haar measure on St(d,r ) at
each communication round, independently of the data sampling and past randomness.
As in Section 3, we denote the subspace ratio by δ = r/d.
    We begin with a basic lemma on the properties of random Stiefel projectors.
ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-31                         11


Lemma 4.1 (Random Stiefel projection). Let d,r be integers with 1 ≤ r ≤ d, and let

                                   Std,r := { P ∈ Rd×r : P⊤ P = Ir }

be the (column) Stiefel manifold. Suppose P is sampled from the uniform (Haar) distribution on
Std,r . Then for any fixed vector g ∈ Rd ,

  (1) E[ PP⊤ ] = dr Id ;
                   
  (2) E ∥ PP⊤ g∥2 = dr ∥ g∥2 ;
                                
  (3) E ∥( Id − PP⊤ ) g∥2 = 1 − dr ∥ g∥2 .

Moreover, the same identities hold if we replace g by any fixed matrix G ∈ Rd×m and interpret ∥·∥
as the Frobenius norm:
                                                                       
              E ∥ PP⊤ G ∥2F = dr ∥ G ∥2F ,    E ∥( Id − PP⊤ ) G ∥2F = 1 − dr ∥ G ∥2F .

Proof. Throughout, expectations are taken with respect to the Haar (uniform) distribution
on Std,r . By definition of this distribution, for every orthogonal matrix Q ∈ O(d), the
random matrices P and QP have the same distribution. In particular, for any measurable
function f ,
                                    E[ f ( P)] = E[ f ( QP)].

Step 1: Computation of E[ PP⊤ ]. Define the random projection matrix

                                         Π := PP⊤ ∈ Rd×d .

Note that Π is symmetric and idempotent:

                   Π⊤ = Π,        Π2 = PP⊤ PP⊤ = P( P⊤ P) P⊤ = PIr P⊤ = Π.

Let
                                  M := E[Π] = E[ PP⊤ ] ∈ Rd×d .
                                                                        d
Fix any orthogonal Q ∈ O(d). Using the distributional identity P = QP and the fact that Q
is deterministic, we obtain

         M = E[ PP⊤ ] = E[( QP)( QP)⊤ ] = E[ QPP⊤ Q⊤ ] = QE[ PP⊤ ] Q⊤ = QMQ⊤ .

Thus M satisfies
                                  QMQ⊤ = M,            ∀ Q ∈ O ( d ).                       (4.1)
By a standard representation-theoretic argument, the only matrices commuting with all
orthogonal matrices are scalar multiples of the identity, so there exists λ ∈ R such that

                                              M = λId .
12                                ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-31


Taking traces and using tr( PP⊤ ) = r almost surely, we obtain
                                      tr( M ) = E[tr( PP⊤ )] = r.
On the other hand, tr( M) = tr(λId ) = λd, so λ = r/d. Hence
                                                       r
                                         E[ PP⊤ ] = M = Id ,
                                                       d
proving item (1).
Step 2: Action on a fixed vector. Let g ∈ Rd be fixed. Then
                                                              r
         E ∥ PP⊤ g∥2 = E g⊤ PP⊤ PP⊤ g = E g⊤ PP⊤ g = g⊤ E[ PP⊤ ] g = ∥ g∥2 ,
                                                                    d
which is item (2). Similarly,
                                                          r         r
           E ∥( Id − PP⊤ ) g∥2 = g⊤ E[ Id − PP⊤ ] g = g⊤ Id − Id g = 1 −    ∥ g ∥2 ,
                                                             d           d
which is item (3).
Step 3: Matrix case and Frobenius norm. Let G ∈ Rd×m be fixed, and write its columns
as
                             G = [ g1 ... gm ], g j ∈ Rd .
Then
       PP⊤ G = [ PP⊤ g1 ... PP⊤ gm ],          ( Id − PP⊤ ) G = [( Id − PP⊤ ) g1 ..., ( Id − PP⊤ ) gm ].
Recall that the Frobenius norm satisfies
                                                         m
                                              ∥ G ∥2F = ∑ ∥ g j ∥2 .
                                                        j =1

Therefore,
                            m                                              m
             ∥ PP⊤ G ∥2F = ∑ ∥ PP⊤ g j ∥2 ,         ∥( Id − PP⊤ ) G ∥2F = ∑ ∥( Id − PP⊤ ) g j ∥2 .
                           j =1                                           j =1

Taking expectations and applying the vector identities from Step 2 column-wise,
                                 m                m r          r
                    E ∥ PP⊤ G ∥2F = ∑ E ∥ PP⊤ g j ∥2 = ∑ ∥ g j ∥2 = ∥ G ∥2F ,
                                    j =1               j =1
                                                            d      d

and
                           m                        m     r              r
      E ∥( Id − PP⊤ ) G ∥2F = ∑ E ∥( Id − PP⊤ ) g j ∥2 = ∑ 1 −    ∥ g j ∥2 = 1 − ∥ G ∥2F .
                              j =1                       j =1
                                                               d                d

This yields the claimed Frobenius-norm identities and completes the proof.
ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-31                                     13


4.2   Drift and One-Round Descent
The main technical challenge in analyzing FedSLoP is the interaction between local mo-
mentum, multiple local steps, and the random subspace constraint. Following the de-
tailed derivations in the proof file, we introduce the per-round drift quantity
                                                  1 N τ −1                    
                                         Dt : =     ∑    ∑
                                                  N i =1 s =0
                                                              Et ∥θi,s − θ t ∥2 ,                       (4.2)

where Et [·] denotes conditional expectation given θ t and the randomness up to the be-
ginning of round t. This quantity measures how far, on average, the local iterates drift
away from the current global model within a communication round.
   The following lemma provides an upper bound of the drift quantity.
Lemma 4.2 (Drift bound under projected momentum). Suppose Assumptions 1 and 2 hold
and the stepsize η satisfies the explicit condition
                                                              1 − µ2
                                                      η2 ≤            ,                                 (4.3)
                                                              6L2 τ 3
it holds that
                                6τ 4 2            t 2     2     2
                                                                   
                                 Dt ≤ η  δ ∇ f ( θ  )  + σL  + σG .                                     (4.4)
                               1 − µ2
Proof. We proceed in three steps.

Step 1: Expressing the drift in terms of momenta. Fix a round t and a client i. Under
the per-round zero-momentum setup, the local recursions are
                                 vi,s+1 = µvi,s + Πt gi,s ,
                                  θi,s+1 = θi,s − ηvi,s+1 ,             s = 0,...,τ − 1,
with θi,0   = θ t and v   i,0 = 0. By telescoping, for any s ≥ 1,
                                                                 s −1
                                               θi,s − θ t = −η ∑ vi,u+1 .
                                                                 u =0
Hence, by Cauchy–Schwarz and the bound s ≤ τ,
                                        s −1          2         s −1                       τ −1
                ∥θi,s − θ t ∥2 = η 2    ∑ vi,u+1          ≤ η 2 s ∑ ∥vi,u+1 ∥2 ≤ η 2 τ ∑ ∥vi,u+1 ∥2 .
                                        u =0                    u =0                       u =0
Summing over s = 0,...,τ − 1 (the s = 0 term is zero) yields
                                       τ −1                         τ −1
                                       ∑ ∥θi,s − θ t ∥2 ≤ η 2 τ2 ∑ ∥vi,u+1 ∥2 .
                                       s =0                         u =0
Averaging over clients and taking conditional expectation gives
                            1 N τ −1                             1 N τ −1         
                    Dt =      ∑    ∑
                            N i =1 s =0
                                        Et ∥θi,s − θ t ∥2 ≤ η 2 τ 2 ∑ ∑ Et ∥vi,u+1 ∥2 .
                                                                   N i =1 u =0
                                                                                                        (4.5)
14                                       ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-31


Step 2: Bounding the momentum norms.                                Unrolling the momentum recursion gives,
for any u ≥ 0,
                                                                       u
                                        vi,u+1 = µu+1 vi,0 + ∑ µu−q Πt gi,q .
                                                                      q =0

Using vi,0 = 0, this simplifies to
                                                             u
                                               vi,u+1 = ∑ µu−q Πt gi,q .
                                                            q =0


Let aq := µu−q Πt gi,q . By Cauchy–Schwarz,
                       u            2                 u                       u
                      ∑ aq              ≤ (u + 1) ∑ ∥ aq ∥2 ≤ τ ∑ µ2(u−q) ∥Πt gi,q ∥2 ,
                      q =0                          q =0                     q =0

where we used u + 1 ≤ τ. Thus
                                                             u
                                        ∥vi,u+1 ∥2 ≤ τ ∑ µ2(u−q) ∥Πt gi,q ∥2 .
                                                           q =0

Summing over u = 0,...,τ − 1 and rearranging the finite sums yields
                             τ −1                         τ −1 u
                             ∑ ∥vi,u+1 ∥2 ≤ τ ∑ ∑ µ2(u−q) ∥Πt gi,q ∥2
                             u =0                         u =0 q =0
                                                          τ −1  τ −1               
                                                  =τ ∑             ∑ µ2(u−q) ∥Πt gi,q ∥2
                                                          q =0 u = q

                                                        τ τ −1
                                                      1 − µ2 q∑
                                                  ≤              ∥Πt gi,q ∥2 ,
                                                              =0


where we used the geometric-series bound ∑τu− 1 2( u − q )
                                            =q µ           ≤ ∑∞     2k          2
                                                              k =0 µ = 1/ (1 − µ ). Substi-
tuting into (4.5), we obtain

                                                 1 N h τ −1                    i
                                                 N i∑
                               Dt ≤ η 2 τ 2               t ∑
                                                                             2
                                                        E        ∥ v i,u+1 ∥
                                                     =1     u =0

                                                 1 N h τ τ −1                         i
                                        ≤ η 2 τ 2 ∑ Et             2   ∑  ∥Πt gi,q ∥2
                                                 N i =1     1 − µ q =0

                                            η 2 τ 3 1 N τ −1                
                                        =          2  ∑  ∑
                                            1 − µ N i =1 q =0
                                                              Et Πt ∥ gi,q ∥2 .                          (4.6)
ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-31                                                        15


Step 3: Bounding Et [∥Πt gi,q ∥2 ] and closing the inequality.                                      By definition gi,q =
∇ Fi (θi,q ;ξ i,q ). Using Assumption 2, we have
                                                                            2                      2
         Et [∥Πt gi,q ∥2 ] = Et         Πt ∇ Fi (θi,q ;ξ i,q )−∇ Fi (θi,q )      + Et Πt ∇ Fi (θi,q )
                                                                          2                     2
                                ≤ Et     ∇ Fi (θi,q ;ξ i,q )−∇ Fi (θi,q )      + Et Πt ∇ Fi (θi,q )
                                                             2
                                ≤ σL2 + Et Πt ∇ Fi (θi,q ) .                                                               (4.7)

Next we bound ∥Πt ∇ Fi (θi,q )∥2 using Assumptions 1 and 2. Insert and subtract Πt ∇ Fi (θ t )
and Πt ∇ f (θ t ):
                                                                                    
    Πt ∇ Fi (θi,q ) = Πt ∇ Fi (θi,q )− Πt ∇ Fi (θ t ) + Πt ∇ Fi (θ t )− Πt ∇ f (θ t ) + Πt ∇ f (θ t ).

Using ∥ a + b + c∥2 ≤ 3(∥ a∥2 +∥b∥2 +∥c∥2 ), the L-smoothness of Fi and the global variance
bound in Assumption 2, we obtain
                   2                                                2                                       2                       2
 Πt ∇ Fi (θi,q )       ≤ 3 Πt ∇ Fi (θi,q )− Πt ∇ Fi (θ t )              + 3 Πt ∇ Fi (θ t )− Πt ∇ f (θ t )       + 3 Πt ∇ f (θ t )
                                                           2                                 2                        2
                       ≤ 3 ∇ Fi (θi,q )−∇ Fi (θ t )            + 3 ∇ Fi (θ t )−∇ f (θ t )        + 3 Πt ∇ f (θ t )
                                                                                2
                       ≤ 3L2 ∥θi,q − θ t ∥2 + 3σG2 + 3 Πt ∇ f (θ t ) .

Taking conditional expectation and applying Lemma 4.1 achieves
                                              2                                                           2
                   Et        Πt ∇ Fi (θi,q )        ≤ 3L2 Et [∥θi,q − θ t ∥2 ]+ 3σG2 + 3δ ∇ f (θ t ) .                     (4.8)

Combining (4.7) and (4.8) gives
                                                      2                     
                   Et ∥Πt gi,q ∥2 ≤ σL2 + 3δ ∇ f (θ t ) + 3L2 Et ∥θi,q − θ t ∥2 + 3σG2 .                                   (4.9)

Substituting (4.9) into (4.6), we obtain

                         η 2 τ 3 1 N τ −1                                                                  
               Dt ≤                ∑    ∑
                         1 − µ 2 N i =1 q =0
                                                3δ ∥∇   f ( θ t 2
                                                               )∥ +   3L 2
                                                                           E t ∥ θ i,q − θ t 2
                                                                                             ∥ + σL
                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                     + 3σG
                                                                                                          2



                         η2 τ3                  t 2            2          2          2
                                                                                             
                       =          3δ ∥∇    f ( θ  )∥ · τ  +  3L   D t +( σ L +   3σ  G  )· τ
                         1 − µ2
                            3η 2 τ 4 δ         t 2   η2 τ4 2          2    3L2 η 2 τ 3
                       =               ∇ f ( θ  )  +        ( σL + 3σG  )+             Dt .                               (4.10)
                             1 − µ2                  1 − µ2                 1 − µ2

Rearranging (4.10) gives
                               3L2 η 2 τ 3        3η 2 τ 4 δ               η2 τ4 2
                                                                       t 2
                           1−                 D t ≤            ∇ f ( θ  )  +       (σ + 3σG2 ).
                                 1 − µ2              1 − µ2                  1 − µ2 L
16                                   ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-31


If the stepsize satisfies (4.3), i.e.
                                                           1 − µ2
                                                  η2 ≤             ,
                                                           6L2 τ 3
then 3L2 η 2 τ 3 /(1 − µ2 ) ≤ 1/2 and therefore

                                                      3L2 η 2 τ 3 1
                                               1−                ≥ .
                                                       1 − µ2     2
This implies

                                   6η 2 τ 4 δ         t 2      2η 2 τ 4 2
                             Dt ≤             ∇ f ( θ  )     +         (σ + 3σG2 )
                                    1 − µ2                     1 − µ2 L
                                    6τ 4 2                 t 2      2     2
                                                                             
                                 ≤          η δ   ∇   f ( θ  )  +  σL  + σG ,
                                   1 − µ2
which is (4.4).

   The next ingredient is a one-round descent inequality that combines smoothness, the
random projector, and the drift quantity.
Lemma 4.3 (One-round descent under random projector). Under Assumptions 1 and 2, if
η ≤ 1/( LSτ ), the random subspace one-round descent satisfies

                                      δ               2 η 2 Sτ2 LσL2     2L2 η
               Et f (θ t+1 ) ≤ f (θ t )− ηSτ ∇ f (θ t ) +              +            Dt ,             (4.11)
                                        2                      N         δ (1 − µ )
              −1                          τ −q ) / (1 − µ ) are the effective momentum weights.
where Sτ = ∑τq= 0 ατ,q and α τ,q = (1 − µ

Proof. We fix a communication round t and work with the conditional expectation Et [·]
given θ t and all past randomness. Recall that the server update can be written as
                                                                       N
                                               ¯ t,
                                θ t +1 = θ t + ∆           ¯ t := 1 ∑ (θi,τ − θ t ).
                                                           ∆
                                                                  N i =1

                 ¯ t in terms of the projected local gradients, then bound the linear descent
We first express ∆
term and the quadratic remainder term separately, and finally combine the bounds.

Step 1: Expressing the aggregated update.                     From the local recursions,

                  vi,s+1 = µvi,s + Πt gi,s ,          θi,s+1 = θi,s − ηvi,s+1 ,   s = 0,...,τ − 1,

with vi,0 = 0 and θi,0 = θ t , it follows by telescoping that
                                                               τ −1
                                           θi,τ − θ t = −η ∑ vi,s+1 .
                                                               s =0
ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-31                             17


Unrolling the momentum recursion gives, for every u ≥ 0,
                                                     u
                                        vi,u+1 = ∑ µ u−q Πt gi,q ,
                                                    q =0

and hence
                                      τ −1                   τ −1 s
                      θi,τ − θ t = −η ∑ vi,s+1 = −η ∑ ∑ µ s−q Πt gi,q
                                      s =0                   s =0 q =0
                                      τ −1  τ −1                       τ −1
                               = −η ∑        ∑ µ s−q Πt gi,q = −η ∑ ατ,q Πt gi,q ,
                                      q =0 s = q                         q =0

where ατ,q = (1 − µτ −q )/(1 − µ) as in the lemma statement. Averaging over clients, we
obtain
                                   τ −1
                          ¯ t = −η ∑ ατ,q Πt ḡq ,       1 N
                          ∆                        ḡq := ∑ gi,q .                (4.12)
                                   q =0                  N i =1

Step 2: Bounding the linear descent term.                  By L-smoothness of f we have the standard
one-step inequality
                                                             ¯ t + L ∥∆
                          f (θ t+1 ) ≤ f (θ t )+ ∇ f (θ t ), ∆        ¯ t ∥2 .
                                                                   2
Taking Et [·] and substituting (4.12),

                                        τ −1                         L        
                                                                             ¯ t ∥2 .
               Et f (θ t+1 ) ≤ f (θ t )− η ∑ ατ,q Et ∇ f (θ t ),Πt ḡq + Et ∥∆                (4.13)
                                           q =0                          2

Fix a local step index q and set g∗ := ∇ f (θ t ). We decompose

                              g∗ ,Πt ḡq = ⟨ g∗ ,Πt g∗ ⟩+ g∗ ,Πt ( ḡq − g∗ ) .

Since g∗ depends only on θ t and the projector Πt is sampled independently from the
Stiefel manifold, Lemma 4.1 (random Stiefel projection) yields
                                               
                                Et ⟨ g∗ ,Πt g∗ ⟩ = δ ∥ g∗ ∥2 .

For the second term we use Assumption 2, Cauchy–Schwarz, the fact that Πt is a contrac-
tion, and Young’s inequality with parameter δ/2:
                                                                 
                    Et g∗ ,Πt ( ḡq − g∗ ) = Et g∗ ,Πt ( g̃q − g∗ )
                                                     ≤ ∥ g∗ ∥ Et [∥ g̃q − g∗ ∥]
                                                       δ             1
                                                     ≤ ∥ g∗ ∥2 + Et [∥ g̃q − g∗ ∥2 ],
                                                       4             δ
18                                    ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-31


where we define

                                                           1 N
                                                           N i∑
                                                  g̃q :=         ∇ Fi (θi,q ).
                                                              =1

Combining the two pieces gives
                                                3δ                1                     
                    Et       g∗ ,Πt ḡq       ≥      ∥∇ f (θ t )∥2 − Et ∥ g̃q −∇ f (θ t )∥2 .        (4.14)
                                                  4                 δ

Substituting (4.14) into (4.13), we obtain

                            3δ              2 η τ −1                       L          
                                                                                    ¯ t ∥2 .
     Et f (θ t+1 ) ≤ f (θ t )− ηSτ ∇ f (θ t ) + ∑ ατ,q Et ∥ g̃q −∇ f (θ t )∥2 + Et ∥∆
                              4                 δ q =0                         2
                                                                                         (4.15)

Step 3: Controlling the stochastic-gradient variance and drift. We now bound the
                                                   ¯ t ∥2 . Using L-smoothness of Fi and
variance term in (4.15) and the quadratic term Et ∥∆
Jensen’s inequality, we have

                                            h 1 N                                2i
                   Et ∥ g̃q −∇ f (θ t )∥2 =Et       ∑
                                                  N i =1
                                                         ∇ Fi (θi,q )−∇ Fi (θ t )

                                            1 N h                                 2i
                                           ≤ ∑ Et ∇ Fi (θi,q )−∇ Fi (θ t )
                                            N i =1
                                                   ≤ L2 D̄q ,                                        (4.16)

where we define
                                                     1 N                   
                                                     N i∑
                                          D̄q :=           Et ∥θi,q − θ t ∥2 .
                                                        =1

Using ατ,q ≤ 1/(1 − µ), we obtain

                                η τ −1                              L2 ηDt
                                  ∑
                                δ q =0
                                       ατ,q Et ∥ g̃q −∇ f (θ t )∥2 ≤
                                                                     δ (1 − µ )
                                                                                .                    (4.17)


Write                                                                                 
                         gi,q = ∇ Fi (θi,q ;ξ i,q ) = ∇ Fi (θi,q )+ gi,q −∇ Fi (θi,q ) ,
so that ḡq −∇ f (θ t ) can be decomposed into (i) stochastic-noise fluctuations around the
local true gradients and (ii) the bias between local and global gradients induced by data
heterogeneity and local drift. A standard variance decomposition using Assumption 2
ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-31                                     19


(unbiasedness and bounded local variance) and the bounded heterogeneity condition
gives

                         h 1 N                                2i N h 1                              2i
Et ∥ ḡq −∇ f (θ t )∥2 =Et
                             N i∑
                                   ∇ Fi ( θ i,q )−∇ Fi ( θ t
                                                             )     + ∑    E t
                                                                              N
                                                                                g i,q −∇ Fi ( θ i,q )
                                =1                                   i =1

                           1 N                               2  σL
                                                                    2
                       ≤     ∑
                           N i =1
                                  Et ∇ Fi (θi,q )−∇ Fi (θ t )    +
                                                                   N
                                 σ2
                       ≤ L2 D̄q + L ,                                                                 (4.18)
                                 N
where we have used the L-smoothness of Fi to control ∥∇ Fi (θi,q )−∇ Fi (θ t )∥2 by
L2 Et ∥θi,q − θ t ∥2 .
                                                                             2
    Next, from the expansion (4.12) and the inequality ∑q aq xq                  ≤ (∑q aq ) ∑q aq ∥ xq ∥2 for
aq ≥ 0, we have

                              τ −1                 
                 ¯ t ∥2 ≤ η 2 Sτ ∑ ατ,q Et ∥Πt ḡq ∥2
            Et ∥ ∆
                                 q =0
                                  τ −1                                              
                         ≤ 2η 2 Sτ ∑ ατ,q Et ∥Πt ∇ f (θ t )∥2 + Et ∥ ḡq −∇ f (θ t )∥2
                                   q =0
                                                           σ2   L2   
                                                    2
                         ≤ 2η 2 Sτ δSτ ∇ f (θ t )       + Sτ L +    Dt ,                              (4.19)
                                                            N 1−µ
                                                                             
where we used the bound ∥Πt ḡq ∥2 ≤ 2∥Πt ∇ f (θ t )∥2 + 2∥Πt ḡq −∇ f (θ t ) ∥2 , (4.18), Lemma
4.1 and ατ,q ≤ 1/(1 − µ).

Step 4: Collecting terms.       Plugging (4.17) and (4.19) into (4.15) and absorbing numerical
constants, we arrive at
                        δ                            2          σ 2  L2 η        L3 η 2 Sτ 
 Et f (θ t+1 ) ≤ f (θ t )− ηSτ (3 − 4LηSτ ) ∇ f (θ t ) + η 2 Sτ2 L L +            +             Dt .
                          4                                       N    δ (1 − µ )    1−µ

When η ≤ 1/( LSτ ), we further have

                                      δ               2 η 2 Sτ2 LσL2     2L2 η
               Et f (θ t+1 ) ≤ f (θ t )− ηSτ ∇ f (θ t ) +              +            Dt ,
                                        2                      N         δ (1 − µ )

which is exactly the claimed one-round descent inequality (4.11). This completes the
proof.

    Combining Lemmas 4.2 and 4.3 yields a clean one-round bound with explicit con-
stants.
20                               ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-31


Lemma 4.4 (One-round descent with drift control). Suppose Assumptions 1 and 2 hold, and
that the stepsize η satisfies
                                      (r             )
                                         1 − µ2 1
                              η ≤ min           ,      .                         (4.20)
                                         6L2 τ 3 LSτ
Then for Algorithm 1 we have, for every round t,
                                        δ        12L2 τ 4 η 3             2
                 Et f (θ t+1 ) ≤ f (θ t )− ηSτ −                2
                                                                   ∇ f (θ t )
                                           2     (1 − µ)(1 − µ )
                                      η 2 Sτ2 LσL2      12L2 τ 4 η 3
                                  +                +                  (σ2 + σG2 ).              (4.21)
                                           N         δ(1 − µ)(1 − µ2 ) L
Proof. Substituting the drift bound (4.4) from Lemma 4.2 into the one-round de-
scent (4.11), and collecting the terms in ∥∇ f (θ t )∥2 and (σL2 + σG2 ), yields (4.21) with the
stated constants.

4.3   Main Full-Participation Convergence Theorem
We are now ready to state and prove the main convergence theorem for FedSLoP.
Theorem 4.1 (Convergence of FedSLoP with explicit constants). Suppose Assumptions 1
and 2 hold, and the algorithm is executed as described in Algorithm 1.
                                                                           −1
    For the momentum weights ατ,q = (1 − µτ −q )/(1 − µ) and Sτ = ∑τq=      0 ατ,q defined above and
the rank ratio δ = r/d ∈ (0,1], assume that the stepsize η > 0 obeys the explicit conditions
                                 (r                r                       )
                                     1 − µ2 1        δ (1 − µ)(1 − µ2 ) Sτ
                       η ≤ min              ,    ,                           .                (4.22)
                                     6L2 τ 3 LSτ           48L2 τ 4

Then for every integer T ≥ 1, the global iterates (θ t )t≥0 of FedSLoP satisfy
              1 T −1                   4                  
                ∑
              T t =0
                     E ∥∇ f (θ t )∥2 ≤
                                       δηSτ T
                                              f (θ 0 )− f ∗

                                            4ηSτ LσL2       48η 2 τ 4 L2
                                        +             + 2                    (σL2 + σG2 ).      (4.23)
                                              δN       δ (1 − µ)(1 − µ2 ) Sτ
Proof. We combine the explicit one-round descent inequality under random Stiefel pro-
jector with the explicit drift bound.

Step 1: One-round descent with drift. By Lemma 4.4, for each round t and conditional
expectation Et [·] given θ t we have
                                        δ        12L2 τ 4 η 3             2
                 Et f (θ t+1 ) ≤ f (θ t )− ηSτ −                2
                                                                   ∇ f (θ t )
                                           2     (1 − µ)(1 − µ )
                                      η 2 Sτ2 LσL2      12L2 τ 4 η 3
                                  +                +                  (σ2 + σG2 ).
                                           N         δ(1 − µ)(1 − µ2 ) L
ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-31                            21


Step 2: Ensuring a negative gradient coefficient. Imposing the additional stepsize con-
dition                             r
                                      δ (1 − µ)(1 − µ2 ) Sτ
                               η≤                           ,
                                            48L2 τ 4
which is equivalent to
                                   12L2 τ 4          δ
                                                η 3 ≤ ηSτ ,
                               (1 − µ)(1 − µ2 )      4
the coefficient in front of ∥∇ f (θ t )∥2 is

                               δ          12L2 τ 4           δ
                              − ηSτ +              2
                                                      η 3 ≤ − ηSτ ,
                               2      (1 − µ)(1 − µ )        4

so the one-round bound simplifies to
                                              δ                2
                     Et f (θ t+1 ) ≤ f (θ t )− ηSτ ∇ f (θ t )
                                                4
                                        η 2 Sτ2 LσL2      12L2 τ 4 η 3
                                     +               +                  (σ2 + σG2 ).          (4.24)
                                             N         δ(1 − µ)(1 − µ2 ) L

This bound holds whenever (4.22) is satisfied.

Step 3: Telescoping and averaging.             Taking full expectation in (4.24) and summing over
t = 0,...,T − 1 yields

                                             T −1              
                                           δ
                     E f (θ T ) ≤ f (θ 0 )− ηSτ ∑ E ∥∇ f (θ t )∥2
                                           4    t =0
                                       η 2 Sτ2 LTσL2     12η 3 τ 4 L2 T
                                   +                 +                  (σ2 + σG2 ).
                                              N        δ(1 − µ)(1 − µ2 ) L

Using the lower boundedness f (θ T ) ≥ f ∗ , dividing both sides by T and by δηSτ /4 and
rearranging gives

              1 T −1                   4                  
                ∑
              T t =0
                     E ∥∇ f (θ t )∥2 ≤
                                       δηSτ T
                                              f (θ 0 )− f ∗

                                             4ηSτ LσL2       48η 2 τ 4 L2
                                         +             + 2                    (σL2 + σG2 ),
                                               δN       δ (1 − µ)(1 − µ2 ) Sτ

which is exactly the bound (4.23) stated in the theorem.
22                                     ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-31


4.4    Asymptotic Rate Under Carefully Selected Step-Size
The explicit convergence bound in Theorem 4.1 can be optimized over the step-size η to
reveal the asymptotic dependence on the number of rounds T and the problem parame-
ters. The following corollary summarizes the result for a carefully selected step-size.

Corollary 4.1 (Optimal convergence rate via carefully-selected step-size). Under the as-
sumptions of Theorem 4.1, let ∆0 := f (θ 0 )− f ∗ . If we choose
         s                       s                             s              s                         −1
              6L2 τ 3                       48L2 τ 4                Sτ2 LTσL2 3 12τ 4 L2 T (σL2 + σG2 )
     η=                + LSτ +                             +                +                           ,
              1 − µ2                  δ(1 − µ)(1 − µ2 )Sτ             N∆0        δ(1 − µ)(1 − µ2 )∆0

the averaged squared gradient norm satisfies
                                                                                                             !
     1 T −1                    ∆1/2
                                   0 L
                                       1/2 σ
                                            L   ∆2/3
                                                 0 L
                                                     2/3 τ 1/3 ( σ2 + σ2 )1/3
                                                                                ∆0 Lτ 1/2
       ∑
     T t =0
            E ∥∇ f ( θ t 2
                        )∥   = O    1/2
                                  δN T   1/2
                                              +          4/3
                                                        δ T 2/3
                                                                  L    G
                                                                              +
                                                                                   δT
                                                                                                                 .
                                 |    {z     } |            {z              }   | {z }
                                       stochastic term      higher-order drift term      optimization term


where O(·) hides only absolute numerical constants (independent of L,τ,δ, N,σL ,σG ). In partic-
ular, the contribution of the local stochastic variance σL2 enjoys a linear speedup factor 1/N in the
dominant variance term.

   Theorem 4.1 and Corollary 4.1 together provide a detailed nonconvex convergence
theory for FedSLoP. The explicit dependence on the subspace ratio δ clarifies how low-
rank random projections affect the convergence property.


5 Numerical Experiments
We now evaluate F ED SL O P on a standard non-IID MNIST classification task and com-
pare it against several federated baselines. The main goals are to assess convergence
speed, final test accuracy, robustness to data heterogeneity, and the effect of the projec-
tion rank and the number of clients.

5.1    Experimental Setup
Dataset and task. We consider 10-class classification on MNIST. The training set con-
tains 60,000 grayscale images and the test set contains 10,000 images. Each image is vec-
torized into R784 . The prediction model is a two-layer multilayer perceptron with archi-
tecture 784 → 128 → 10 and ReLU activation in the hidden layer. The loss function is the
standard cross-entropy loss.
ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-31                           23



                       Table 1: Main federated configuration on non-IID MNIST.
     Parameter                                   Value
     Number of clients p                         50
     Dirichlet concentration α                   0.1 (main), {0.05,0.1,0.5,1.0} (sensitivity)
     Communication rounds T                      100
     Local epochs per round                      1
     Mini-batch size b                           32
     Learning rate η                             0.01839685275139246
     F ED SL O P projection rank r               112 (main), varied in ablation
     F ED SL O P momentum                        ≈ 0.805
     F ED L O RAW ITH M OMENTUM rank             15


Federated partition. We use 50 clients and distribute the training data by label-wise
Dirichlet partitioning. In the main experiment the Dirichlet concentration parameter is
α = 0.1, which creates a strongly heterogeneous non-IID setting. In the heterogeneity
study we vary α ∈ {0.05,0.1,0.5,1.0}.

Compared methods.         We compare the proposed F ED SL O P against the following base-
lines:

   • FedAvgWithMomentum: full-parameter federated averaging with server-side mo-
     mentum;

   • FedMef: magnitude-based sparse update baseline;

   • FederatedSelect: random parameter-subset update baseline;

   • NeuLite: block-wise partial-update baseline;

   • FedLoRAWithMomentum: LoRA-based low-rank model adaptation with server-
     side momentum.

Training configuration. In the main comparison we train for T = 100 communication
rounds, use one local epoch per round, batch size 32, and three random seeds {0,1,2}.
The learning rate is fixed to

                                    η = 0.01839685275139246,

which is selected from the tuning procedure used for F ED SL O P and then reused across
methods for a fair comparison. For the proposed method the main projection rank is
r = 112. For the LoRA baseline we use rank 15.
24                                                                    ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-31



Table 2: Final test accuracy on non-IID MNIST with α = 0.1 after T = 100 communication rounds (mean ±
standard deviation over three seeds).
                      Method                                                  Final test accuracy (mean ± std)                                                Compression ratio
                      FedAvgWithMomentum                                                         0.9551 ± 0.0015                                                               1
                      FedSLoP                                                                    0.9511 ± 0.0028                                                             15.3%
                      FedLoRAWithMomentum                                                        0.9247 ± 0.0063                                                             15.5%
                      FedMef                                                                     0.8965 ± 0.0062                                                             15.0%
                      FederatedSelect                                                            0.8759 ± 0.0060                                                             15.0%
                      NeuLite                                                                    0.8665 ± 0.0078                                                             15.0%

                                                                                                                                         MNIST Federated Learning: Final Accuracy Comparison
                               MNIST Federated Learning: Convergence Curves                                                    1.0      0.955      0.951
                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.925
                                                                                                                                                             0.897                          0.876
                                                                                                                                                                          0.867
                0.9
                                                                                                                               0.8
                0.8




                                                                                                         Final Test Accuracy
                0.7
                                                                                                                               0.6

Test Accuracy
                0.6

                0.5
                                                                                                                               0.4
                0.4
                                                                               FedAvg-M
                0.3                                                            FedSLop
                                                                               FedMef                                          0.2
                                                                               NeuLite
                0.2                                                            FederatedSelect
                                                                               FedLoRA-M
                       0      20             40            60            80              100                                   0.0
                                                  Round                                                                                     g-M        Lop        e   f          ite                lect LoRA-M
                                                                                                                                       FedA
                                                                                                                                           v      FedS       FedM         NeuL              ratedSe     Fed
                                                                                                                                                                                       Fede
         Test accuracy vs. communication rounds
                                                                                                                                     Final test accuracy at round T = 100

Figure 1: Convergence and final precision on non-IID MNIST (α = 0.1). Left: test accuracy over communication
rounds. Right: final test accuracy.


5.2                        Main Comparison on Non-IID MNIST
Table 2 reports the final test accuracy after 100 communication rounds. The strongest
baseline is F ED AVG W ITH M OMENTUM, which reaches 0.9551 ± 0.0015. The proposed
F ED SL O P achieves 0.9511 ± 0.0028, remaining very close to the full-parameter baseline
while clearly outperforming the sparse and partial-update methods. The LoRA base-
line also performs competitively, but still trails F ED SL O P by more than two percentage
points.
    Figure 1 shows the corresponding convergence curves and final-accuracy summary.
The gap between F ED SL O P and F ED AVG W ITH M OMENTUM stays small throughout
training, whereas the sparse and blockwise baselines converge more slowly and satu-
rate at lower accuracies. This indicates that low-rank projection of the optimizer state
preserves most of the optimization benefit of full-parameter training while substantially
reducing the effective update dimension.
ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-31                                                25



Table 3: Final test accuracy on MNIST after T = 100 communication rounds for different Dirichlet parameters
α (mean over three seeds). Smaller α means stronger heterogeneity.
             Method                                         α = 0.05       α = 0.10     α = 0.50          α = 1.00
             FedAvgWithMomentum                              0.9035        0.9551           0.9722        0.9739
             FedSLoP                                         0.9269        0.9511           0.9700        0.9708
             FedLoRAWithMomentum                             0.8838        0.9247           0.9558        0.9616
             FedMef                                          0.8709        0.8965           0.9283        0.9317
             FederatedSelect                                 0.8257        0.8759           0.9064        0.9101
             NeuLite                                         0.7965        0.8665           0.9075        0.9100

                                                      MNIST Federated: Alpha Sensitivity
                                            0.975
                                            0.950
                                            0.925



                      Final test accuracy
                                            0.900
                                            0.875
                                                                                        FedAvg-M
                                            0.850                                       FedSLop
                                                                                        FedMef
                                            0.825                                       NeuLite
                                                                                        FederatedSelect
                                            0.800                                       FedLoRA-M
                                                    0.2       0.4         0.6         0.8          1.0
                                                           Dirichlet concentration

Figure 2: Sensitivity to the Dirichlet concentration parameter α. Final test accuracy after 100 communication
rounds.


5.3   Robustness to Statistical Heterogeneity
To study sensitivity to the non-IID level, we vary the Dirichlet concentration parame-
ter. The results are summarized in Table 3 and Figure 2. As α decreases, all methods
deteriorate, but the extent of deterioration differs substantially.
    The most notable case is the extreme non-IID regime α = 0.05: F ED SL O P reaches
0.9269, while F ED AVG W ITH M OMENTUM drops to 0.9035. Thus the proposed method
is more robust than the strongest full-parameter baseline under severe heterogeneity. For
milder heterogeneity levels (α ≥ 0.1), F ED AVG W ITH M OMENTUM retains a small advan-
tage, but the difference remains modest.
    These results suggest that the projected update structure of F ED SL O P acts as an ef-
fective regularizer in highly heterogeneous regimes. The sparse and blockwise baselines
degrade much more sharply, while the LoRA baseline lies in between: it is more stable
than the sparse baselines but still clearly below F ED SL O P in the hardest setting.
26                                           ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-31



      Table 4: Rank ablation for FedSLoP on MNIST with α = 0.1 after 100 communication rounds.
                              Projection rank r          Final accuracy (mean ± std)
                              16                                 0.8907 ± 0.0113
                              32                                 0.9148 ± 0.0055
                              64                                 0.9392 ± 0.0035
                              112                                0.9511 ± 0.0028
                              192                                0.9561 ± 0.0034

                               FedSLop: Convergence under Different proj_rank (synthetic)
                                   0.9
                                   0.8
                                   0.7


                   Test Accuracy
                                   0.6
                                   0.5
                                   0.4                                       proj_rank=16
                                                                             proj_rank=32
                                   0.3                                       proj_rank=64
                                   0.2                                       proj_rank=112
                                                                             proj_rank=192
                                   0.1
                                         0      20        40           60      80        100
                                                               Round
                  Figure 3: Convergence of FedSLoP for different projection ranks r.


5.4   Projection-Rank Ablation
The projection rank r is the central design parameter of F ED SL O P. Table 4 and Figure 3
report the effect of varying r ∈ {16,32,64,112,192} under the same MNIST setup.
    The trend is monotone and intuitive: increasing r substantially improves performance
from r = 16 to r = 112, while the gain from r = 112 to r = 192 is relatively small. Hence
r = 112 already captures most of the useful optimization subspace in this MNIST task.

5.5   Scaling with the Number of Clients
We next fix the projection rank at r = 112 and vary the number of clients. Table 5 and
Figure 4 summarize the results.
   Increasing the number of clients from 10 to 50 noticeably improves both convergence
speed and final accuracy. However, the gain from 50 to 100 clients is marginal, indicating
a diminishing-returns regime in which additional client participation mainly increases
communication cost without bringing comparable accuracy improvements.
ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-31                                      27



    Table 5: Client-number ablation for FedSLoP on MNIST with α = 0.1 after 100 communication rounds.
         Number of clients p                   Total uplink elements         Final accuracy (mean ± std)
         10                                            203,540                      0.9199 ± 0.0094
         20                                            407,080                      0.9341 ± 0.0089
         50                                           1,017,700                     0.9472 ± 0.0026
         100                                          2,035,400                     0.9479 ± 0.0010

                            FedSLop: Convergence under Different num_clients (synthetic)
                                     0.9
                                     0.8
                                     0.7


                     Test Accuracy
                                     0.6
                                     0.5
                                     0.4
                                                                              num_clients=10
                                     0.3                                      num_clients=20
                                     0.2                                      num_clients=50
                                                                              num_clients=100
                                     0.1
                                           0     20        40           60        80        100
                                                                Round
                    Figure 4: Convergence of FedSLoP for different numbers of clients.


5.6    Summary
Across all experiments, F ED SL O P achieves a strong balance between accuracy and com-
munication efficiency. On non-IID MNIST it remains very close to the full-parameter
F ED AVG W ITH M OMENTUM baseline, substantially outperforms sparse and blockwise
update methods, and shows markedly better robustness in the strongly heterogeneous
regime. The rank and client-number ablations further indicate that moderate projection
rank and moderate client population already capture most of the attainable benefit in this
task.


6     Conclusion
We have proposed FedSLoP, a FedAvg-style federated learning algorithm that integrates
random low-rank subspace projections with momentum in order to reduce client-side
memory usage while retaining the simplicity and robustness of the standard FL work-
flow. By sampling a fresh Stiefel subspace at each communication round and constraining
all local stochastic gradients and momentum updates to this subspace, FedSLoP reduces
28                             ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-31


the effective dimensionality of the optimizer state and the communicated directions with-
out modifying the underlying model architecture.
    On the theoretical side, we developed a detailed nonconvex convergence analysis for
FedSLoP under full client participation and random Stiefel projectors. Under standard
smoothness and bounded-variance assumptions, we derived explicit bounds on the aver-
aged squared gradient norm that exhibit an O(1/T ) optimization term and an O( T −1/2 )
variance term, with constants that depend explicitly on the subspace ratio δ = r/d, the
number of local steps τ, the momentum parameter µ, and the number of clients N. The
resulting variance floor contains a linear speedup factor 1/N in the local variance term,
and a harmonic step-size strategy yields a provably near-optimal balance between opti-
mization, variance, and drift terms.
    On the empirical side, our experiments on federated MNIST classification with
Dirichlet non-IID partitions showed that FedSLoP closely tracks the convergence of a
strong FedAvgWithMomentum baseline while substantially outperforming sparse and
low-rank model baselines such as FedMef, NeuLite, FederatedSelect, and FedLoRAW-
ithMomentum. Projection-rank and client-number ablations revealed clear diminishing-
returns regimes and confirmed that moderate ranks and client counts already suffice to
capture the dominant gradient subspace and achieve stable, accurate training under se-
vere heterogeneity.
    Taken together, these results demonstrate that constraining the optimizer state
to random low-dimensional subspaces is a principled and effective strategy for
communication- and memory-efficient federated learning. Several directions remain
for future work. Extending the convergence analysis to partial participation and asyn-
chronous settings, incorporating adaptive or data-dependent subspace selection, and ap-
plying FedSLoP to larger-scale models and tasks (e.g., language modeling and vision
transformers) are particularly promising. Another avenue is to combine the subspace-
based design with advanced compression and personalization techniques, further clos-
ing the gap between theoretical guarantees and the demanding system constraints of
real-world FL deployments.


References
 [1] Dan Alistarh, Demjan Grubic, Jerry Li, Ryota Tomioka, and Milan Vojnovic. Qsgd:
     Communication-efficient sgd via gradient quantization and encoding. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:1610.02132v4, 2016.
 [2] Debraj Basu, Deepesh Data, Can Karakus, and Suhas Diggavi. Qsparse-local-SGD: Dis-
     tributed SGD with quantization, sparsification, and local computations. IEEE Journal on
     Selected Areas in Information Theory, 2019.
 [3] Aleksandr Beznosikov, Samuel Horváth, Peter Richtárik, and Mher Safaryan. On biased
     compression for distributed learning. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 2020.
 [4] Ziheng Cheng, Xinmeng Huang, Pengfei Wu, and Kun Yuan. Momentum benefits non-
     iid federated learning simply and provably. In Proceedings of the International Conference on
     Learning Representations, 2023.
ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-31                            29


 [5] Laurent Condat, Artavazd Maranjyan, and Peter Richtárik. Locodl: Communication-
     efficient distributed learning with local training and compression. In International Conference
     on Learning Representations, 2024.
 [6] DeepSeek-AI, Aixin Liu, Bei Feng, Bin Wang, Bingxuan Wang, Bo Liu, Chenggang Zhao,
     Chengqi Dengr, Chong Ruan, Damai Dai, Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Deli Chen, Dongjie Ji,
     Erhang Li, Fangyun Lin, Fuli Luo, Guangbo Hao, Guanting Chen, Guowei Li, H. Zhang,
     Hanwei Xu, Hao Yang, Haowei Zhang, Honghui Ding, Huajian Xin, Huazuo Gao, Hui Li,
     Hui Qu, J. L. Cai, Jian Liang, Jianzhong Guo, Jiaqi Ni, Jiashi Li, Jin Chen, Jingyang Yuan,
     Junjie Qiu, Junxiao Song, Kai Dong, Kaige Gao, Kang Guan, Lean Wang, Lecong Zhang,
     Lei Xu, Leyi Xia, Liang Zhao, Liyue Zhang, Meng Li, Miaojun Wang, Mingchuan Zhang,
     Minghua Zhang, Minghui Tang, Mingming Li, Ning Tian, Panpan Huang, Peiyi Wang, Peng
     Zhang, Qihao Zhu, Qinyu Chen, Qiushi Du, R. J. Chen, R. L. Jin, Ruiqi Ge, Ruizhe Pan,
     Runxin Xu, Ruyi Chen, S. S. Li, Shanghao Lu, Shangyan Zhou, Shanhuang Chen, Shaoqing
     Wu, Shengfeng Ye, Shirong Ma, Shiyu Wang, Shuang Zhou, Shuiping Yu, Shunfeng Zhou,
     Size Zheng, T. Wang, Tian Pei, Tian Yuan, Tianyu Sun, W. L. Xiao, Wangding Zeng, Wei An,
     Wen Liu, Wenfeng Liang, Wenjun Gao, Wentao Zhang, X. Q. Li, Xiangyue Jin, Xianzu Wang,
     Xiao Bi, Xiaodong Liu, Xiaohan Wang, Xiaojin Shen, Xiaokang Chen, Xiaosha Chen, Xiaotao
     Nie, Xiaowen Sun, Xiaoxiang Wang, Xin Liu, Xin Xie, Xingkai Yu, Xinnan Song, Xinyi Zhou,
     Xinyu Yang, Xuan Lu, Xuecheng Su, Y. Wu, Y. K. Li, Y. X. Wei, Y. X. Zhu, Yanhong Xu,
     Yanping Huang, Yao Li, Yao Zhao, Yaofeng Sun, Yaohui Li, Yaohui Wang, Yi Zheng, Yichao
     Zhang, Yiliang Xiong, Yilong Zhao, Ying He, Ying Tang, Yishi Piao, Yixin Dong, Yixuan Tan,
     Yiyuan Liu, Yongji Wang, Yongqiang Guo, Yuchen Zhu, Yuduan Wang, Yuheng Zou, Yukun
     Zha, Yunxian Ma, Yuting Yan, Yuxiang You, Yuxuan Liu, Z. Z. Ren, Zehui Ren, Zhangli Sha,
     Zhe Fu, Zhen Huang, Zhen Zhang, Zhenda Xie, Zhewen Hao, Zhihong Shao, Zhiniu Wen,
     Zhipeng Xu, Zhongyu Zhang, Zhuoshu Li, Zihan Wang, Zihui Gu, Zilin Li, and Ziwei Xie.
     DeepSeek-V2: A strong, economical, and efficient mixture-of-experts language model. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2405.04434v5, 2024.
 [7] Haoze He, Jing Wang, and Anna Choromanska. Adjacent leader decentralized stochastic
     gradient descent. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2024.
 [8] Yutong He, Xinmeng Huang, Yiming Chen, Wotao Yin, and Kun Yuan. Lower bounds and
     accelerated algorithms in distributed stochastic optimization with communication compres-
     sion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.07612, 2023.
 [9] Yutong He, Xinmeng Huang, and Kun Yuan. Unbiased compression saves communication
     in distributed optimization: When and how much? In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
     cessing Systems, 2023.
[10] Yutong He, Pengrui Li, Yipeng Hu, Chuyan Chen, and Kun Yuan. Subspace optimization for
     large language models with convergence guarantees. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.11289, 2024.
[11] Samuel Horváth, Dmitry Kovalev, Konstantin Mishchenko, Sebastian Stich, and Peter
     Richtárik. Stochastic distributed learning with gradient quantization and variance reduc-
     tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.05115, 2019.
[12] Like Jian and Dong Liu. Widening the network mitigates the impact of data heterogeneity
     on FedAvg. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning, 2025.
[13] Sai Praneeth Karimireddy, Satyen Kale, Mehryar Mohri, Sashank J. Reddi, Sebastian U.
     Stich, and Ananda Theertha Suresh. SCAFFOLD: Stochastic controlled averaging for fed-
     erated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.06378v4, 2019.
[14] Sai Praneeth Karimireddy, Quentin Rebjock, Sebastian U. Stich, and Martin Jaggi. Error
     feedback fixes signsgd and other gradient compression schemes. In Proceedings of the Inter-
30                              ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-31


     national Conference on Machine Learning, 2019.
[15] Xiang Li, Kaixuan Huang, Wenhao Yang, Shusen Wang, and Zhihua Zhang. On the conver-
     gence of FedAvg on non-IID data. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning
     Representations, 2019.
[16] Xiangru Lian, Wei Zhang, Ce Zhang, and Ji Liu. Asynchronous decentralized parallel
     stochastic gradient descent. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learn-
     ing, 2017.
[17] Junkang Liu, Fanhua Shang, Junchao Zhou, Hongying Liu, Yuanyuan Liu, and Jin Liu.
     Fedmuon: Accelerating federated learning with matrix orthogonalization. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2510.27403v1, 2025.
[18] Klaus Neymeyr. A geometric convergence theory for the preconditioned steepest descent
     iteration. SIAM Journal on Numerical Analysis, 2011.
[19] Yaqian Qi, Yuan Feng, Xiangxiang Wang, Hanzhe Li, and Jingxiao Tian. Leveraging fed-
     erated learning and edge computing for recommendation systems within cloud computing
     networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.03165v2, 2024.
[20] Xun Qian, Peter Richtárik, and Tong Zhang. Error compensated distributed sgd can be
     accelerated. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020.
[21] Zhaonan Qu, Kaixiang Lin, Zhaojian Li, Jiayu Zhou, and Zhengyuan Zhou. A unified linear
     speedup analysis of federated averaging and nesterov FedAvg. Journal of Artificial Intelligence
     Research, 2020.
[22] Hamza Reguieg, Mohammed El Hanjri, Mohamed El Kamili, and Abdellatif Kobbane. A
     comparative evaluation of fedavg and per-fedavg algorithms for dirichlet distributed het-
     erogeneous data. In International Conference on Wireless Networks and Mobile Communications,
     2023.
[23] Sebastian U. Stich, Jean-Baptiste Cordonnier, and Martin Jaggi. Sparsified sgd with memory.
     In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2018.
[24] Sebastian U. Stich and Sai Praneeth Karimireddy. The error-feedback framework: Bet-
     ter rates for SGD with delayed gradients and compressed communication. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:1909.05350, 2019.
[25] Lili Su, Jiaming Xu, and Pengkun Yang. A non-parametric view of FedAvg and FedProx:
     Beyond stationary points. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 2021.
[26] Yuki Takezawa and Sebastian U. Stich. Scalable decentralized learning with teleportation.
     In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025.
[27] Hanlin Tang, Xiangru Lian, Ming Yan, Ce Zhang, and Ji Liu. D2 : Decentralized training over
     decentralized data. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning, 2018.
[28] Hanlin Tang, Xiangru Lian, Chen Yu, Tong Zhang, and Ji Liu. DoubleSqueeze: Parallel
     stochastic gradient descent with double-pass error-compensated compression. In Proceed-
     ings of the International Conference on Machine Learning, 2019.
[29] Quoc Tran-Dinh, Nhan H. Pham, Dzung T. Phan, and Lam M. Nguyen. FedDR – random-
     ized douglas-rachford splitting algorithms for nonconvex federated composite optimiza-
     tion. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.
[30] Anastasiia Usmanova, François Portet, Philippe Lalanda, and German Vega. A distillation-
     based approach integrating continual learning and federated learning for pervasive services.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.04197v1, 2021.
[31] Thijs Vogels, Sai Praneeth Karimireddy, and Martin Jaggi. Powersgd: Practical low-rank gra-
     dient compression for distributed optimization. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
     Systems, 2019.
ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-31                           31


[32] Yingchao Wang and Wenqi Niu. Federated progressive self-distillation with logits calibra-
     tion for personalized iiot edge intelligence. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.00410v1, 2024.
[33] Ming Xiang, Stratis Ioannidis, Edmund Yeh, Carlee Joe-Wong, and Lili Su. Towards bias
     correction of FedAvg over nonuniform and time-varying communications. In Proceedings of
     the IEEE Conference on Decision and Control, 2023.
[34] Ran Xin, Usman A. Khan, and Soummya Kar. An improved convergence analysis for decen-
     tralized online stochastic non-convex optimization. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing,
     2020.
[35] Haibo Yang, Minghong Fang, and Jia Liu. Achieving linear speedup with partial worker
     participation in non-IID federated learning. In Proceedings of the International Conference on
     Learning Representations, 2021.
[36] Fuxun Yu, Weishan Zhang, Zhuwei Qin, Zirui Xu, Di Wang, Chenchen Liu, Zhi Tian, and
     Xiang Chen. Heterogeneous federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.06767v2, 2020.
[37] Honglin Yuan, Manzil Zaheer, and Sashank Reddi. Federated composite optimization. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2011.08474v3, 2020.
[38] Kun Yuan, Sulaiman A. Alghunaim, and Xinmeng Huang. Removing data heterogeneity
     influence enhances network topology dependence of decentralized SGD. Journal of Machine
     Learning Research, 2021.
[39] Hao Zhang, Tingting Wu, Siyao Cheng, and Jie Liu. CC-FedAvg: Computationally cus-
     tomized federated averaging. IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 2022.
[40] Jiaojiao Zhang, Jiang Hu, and Mikael Johansson. Non-convex composite federated learning
     with heterogeneous data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.03958v1, 2025.
[41] Jiaojiao Zhang, Yuqi Xu, and Kun Yuan. An efficient subspace algorithm for federated learn-
     ing on heterogeneous data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.05213, 2025.
[42] Yuan Zhou, Jiachen Zhong, Xinli Shi, Guanghui Wen, and Xinghuo Yu. FedCanon: Non-
     convex composite federated learning with efficient proximal operation on heterogeneous
     data. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, 2025.
                                                                       Vol. 0, No. Submitted, pp. 1-
CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math.
                                                                       46
doi:
                                                                       03 2025




Subspace SCAFFOLD for Efficient Federated Learn-
ing under Heterogeneous Data
ReasFlow Paper Copilot


          Abstract. Federated learning increasingly operates in a large-model regime where
          communication, memory, and computation are all scarce. At the same time, non-IID
          client data induce drift that degrades the stability of local training. Existing remedies
          address only part of this challenge: full-dimensional variance-reduction methods such
          as SCAFFOLD are robust to heterogeneity but expensive, whereas compression and
          subspace methods improve efficiency without providing a native low-dimensional drift-
          correction mechanism. This paper studies Subspace-SCAFFOLD (SSF), which performs
          federated optimization in a low-dimensional subspace, communicates only projected
          quantities, and preserves full-dimensional control information through a backfill-style
          update that retains residual components when the active subspace changes. Under
          standard smoothness and bounded-variance
                                     √                  assumptions, SSF attains a non-asymptotic
          rate of order eO(1/T + 1/ NKT ). Experiments show favorable accuracy–efficiency
          trade-offs under heterogeneous data.
AMS subject classifications: 68Q25, 68T07, 90C15
Key words: federated learning, communication efficiency, subspace optimization, SCAFFOLD,
heterogeneous data




1 Introduction
Federated learning (FL) has emerged as a central paradigm for privacy-preserving dis-
tributed training, where a central server coordinates optimization of a shared model across
many clients that keep their data local. The standard Federated Averaging (FedAvg)
algorithm amortizes communication by allowing multiple local updates between syn-
chronization rounds, and has become a widely adopted baseline due to its simplicity and
empirical success in practical deployments [11, 16, 17, 20]. However, modern FL applica-
tions increasingly involve models with hundreds of millions or even billions of parameters
and large-scale datasets deployed on resource-constrained edge devices [18, 31]. In this
large-model regime, federated optimization faces a triple challenge in terms of computation,
memory, and communication: each local training step can be computationally heavy, stor-
ing full model states stresses limited device memory, and transmitting full-dimensional
updates over constrained bandwidth becomes prohibitive.

http://www.global-sci.org/csiam-am                   1                   ©2025 Global-Science Press
2                                       Anonymous / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 0 (2025), pp. 1-46


    These challenges are further exacerbated in realistic heterogeneous environments
where client data distributions differ substantially from each other and from the global
distribution. In such non-IID settings, the local objective functions Fi become misaligned,
inducing client drift in local updates and degrading the stability and convergence of
FedAvg and its variants [12, 25, 26]. Heterogeneity-correction methods such as SCAFFOLD
address this issue by introducing control variates on the server and clients to correct
local gradients, leading to convergence guarantees that resemble centralized training
even under strong heterogeneity and partial participation [9]. While highly effective as
robustness baselines in small- to medium-scale settings, these methods are especially costly
in the large-model regime: they require storing full-dimensional auxiliary states at each
client, communicating additional full-dimensional control variates between the server and
clients, and computing extra full-gradient–like corrections at every local step. As a result,
full-dimensional heterogeneity-correction methods are at odds with the triple-efficiency
requirements of large-scale FL on memory- and bandwidth-limited devices.
    To alleviate these resource constraints, several complementary lines of work have
been explored in federated and distributed optimization. A first line focuses on reducing
communication cost via gradient or model compression. Quantization and sparsification
techniques such as QSGD and sparse SGD compress updates before transmission, and
error-feedback mechanisms compensate for the bias introduced by compression [1, 3, 5–
7, 13, 21–24].
    These methods can substantially lower the number of bits communicated per round
and are widely used in practice. However, they typically operate on full-dimensional
gradients or model differences, so the communication cost still scales with the ambient
dimension d of the model parameters, and the reduction is mainly in constant factors
rather than dimensionality. More critically for large models, error-feedback schemes
maintain full-dimensional error buffers to accumulate discarded information, which do
not reduce—and often increase—the memory footprint on each client. When combined
with full-dimensional control variates or other auxiliary states, compression and error-
feedback can therefore aggravate memory pressure even as they reduce raw bandwidth
usage.
    A second line of work leverages subspace and low-rank parameterizations to obtain
more holistic efficiency gains. In centralized training, methods such as GaLore project
gradients onto low-rank subspaces to reduce the cost of backpropagation while preserving
performance [32]. In federated learning, subspace and low-rank approaches—such as
those using low-dimensional adapters, partial model training, or low-rank drift vari-
ables in subspace-based federated learning methods [14, 30]—constrain optimization to
a low-dimensional subspace or factorization. This design yields simultaneous reduc-
tions in computation, communication, and memory: local updates are computed in an
r-dimensional space with r ≪ d, communicated quantities are low-dimensional, and only
subspace parameters or low-rank factors need to be stored. However, in strongly hetero-
geneous FL, these methods often lack robust mechanisms to control client drift. Many
subspace FL algorithms do not integrate SCAFFOLD-style heterogeneity correction, and
Anonymous / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 0 (2025), pp. 1-46                                   3


naive attempts to introduce low-rank drift compensation variables face serious stability
issues: when the underlying subspace frequently changes or rotates, the low-rank com-
pensation variables must be repeatedly re-aligned, making it difficult to maintain effective
updates and leading to degraded correction quality and convergence. Consequently, while
subspace and low-rank methods excel in efficiency, their convergence robustness under
heterogeneity remains limited.
    More broadly, existing approaches still exhibit a fundamental tension between robust-
ness and efficiency along the three core resource dimensions. Full-dimensional correction
and gradient-tracking methods maintain strong control of client drift but incur signifi-
cant computation, communication, and memory overhead by operating in Rd [9, 10, 15].
Compression with error feedback can mitigate communication costs, yet continues to rely
on full-dimensional auxiliary buffers, leaving the memory footprint large or even larger
[1, 3, 7, 13, 21, 22, 24]. Subspace and low-rank FL methods reduce computation, com-
munication, and memory by working in low-dimensional parameterizations [14, 30, 32],
but they do not implement SCAFFOLD-style drift correction in a principled way. Naive
combinations that keep static full-dimensional control variates while training in evolv-
ing subspaces either retain the full-dimensional auxiliary states—negating the subspace
efficiency benefits—or discard accumulated correction information whenever the sub-
space changes, thereby undermining the very variance-reduction properties that make
SCAFFOLD effective.
    This state of affairs highlights a key gap: there is currently no federated optimization
algorithm that performs native heterogeneity correction in a low-dimensional subspace, so
as to (i) preserve SCAFFOLD-level robustness to client drift and convergence behavior,
while (ii) simultaneously achieving subspace-level efficiency in computation, communi-
cation, and memory. Our goal in this work is to fill this gap. Our contributions are as
follows.

   • We propose Subspace-SCAFFOLD (SSF), a federated optimization algorithm that
     unifies SCAFFOLD-style heterogeneity correction with subspace training to address
     the triple challenge of computation, memory, and communication in large-model FL.
     SSF constrains all optimization steps to a low-dimensional subspace defined by a
     projection matrix or low-rank parameterization: local updates and all communicated
     quantities live in this r-dimensional space, with r ≪ d, while the underlying goal re-
     mains to optimize the original high-dimensional model parameters for downstream
     tasks. Crucially, SSF maintains server and client control variates natively in the opti-
     mization subspace and uses their difference to correct projected gradients during local
     updates, mirroring the SCAFFOLD correction mechanism without ever introducing
     full-dimensional auxiliary states. When the subspace basis is updated or rotated, SSF
     employs a translation mechanism that consistently maps the accumulated control
     variates into the new basis, preserving historical variance-reduction information
     rather than discarding it when the subspace evolves. Through this subspace-native
     design, SSF achieves simultaneous savings in computation, communication, and
4                                         Anonymous / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 0 (2025), pp. 1-46


        memory, while explicitly correcting client drift under data heterogeneity. At the same
        time, SSF preserves the convergence behavior one would expect from single-node
        subspace training, so that the efficiency gains from low-dimensional optimization
        do not come at the cost of degraded convergence rates.

      • We provide a comprehensive non-asymptotic convergence analysis for SSF under
        standard smoothness and bounded-variance assumptions on stochastic gradients.
        We first show that when gradients are projected through any matrix with spectral
        norm at most one and an appropriate local learning rate is used, the projected
        stochastic gradients satisfy the same type of bounded-variance property as in the
        full space. Building on a subspace client-drift bound and a harmonic coupling of
        the global and
                     √ local stepsizes, we obtain a transient iteration complexity of order
         e
        O(1/T + 1/ NKT ) for the average squared gradient norm, where N is the number
        of participating clients per round and K is the number of local steps. This establishes
        linear speedup in N and K and shows that subspace-based heterogeneity correction
        can achieve SCAFFOLD-level convergence behavior while avoiding full-dimensional
        auxiliary states.

      • We empirically evaluate SSF in representative heterogeneous federated learning
        scenarios with large models and resource-constrained clients, comparing against
        full-dimensional heterogeneity-correction methods, compressed communication
        baselines, and existing subspace FL algorithms. The experiments demonstrate that
        SSF simultaneously reduces memory usage, communication volume, and local
        computation cost, while preserving robustness to data heterogeneity and achieving
        fast convergence. These empirical results confirm that the proposed subspace-based
        heterogeneity-correction mechanism can deliver strong accuracy–efficiency trade-
        offs in practical large-model FL deployments.


2      Related Work
The existing literature can be organized around three complementary but only partially
compatible design goals: robustness to heterogeneity through variance reduction, com-
munication efficiency through compression, and holistic efficiency through subspace or
low-rank optimization. This taxonomy, which is strongly supported by the survey assets,
is useful for positioning our work because Subspace-SCAFFOLD is intended to operate
precisely at the intersection of these three lines rather than within any single one of them.


2.1     Federated Learning, Heterogeneity, and Variance Reduction
The foundational Federated Averaging (FedAvg) algorithm established the paradigm of
communication-efficient training via iterative local SGD and periodic model averaging
Anonymous / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 0 (2025), pp. 1-46                                     5


[11, 16]. Its empirical success spurred extensive theoretical analysis, establishing conver-
gence guarantees in convex and nonconvex settings and clarifying the communication–
optimization trade-off induced by local steps [12, 17, 20, 26]. At the same time, these
analyses make clear that statistical heterogeneity induces client drift: local iterates move
toward client-specific objectives and can become systematically misaligned with the global
objective, especially under partial participation or unreliable communication [12, 25].
Specialized remedies based on architecture or overparameterization can mitigate this phe-
nomenon in certain settings [8, 27], but they do not provide a general optimization-level
correction mechanism.
    A more principled response is variance reduction through auxiliary states. The SCAF-
FOLD algorithm introduces client and server control variates to correct the local descent
direction, thereby reducing drift and recovering convergence guarantees that resemble cen-
tralized training even under strong heterogeneity and client sampling [9]. This perspective
is closely related to gradient tracking in decentralized optimization [10, 15]. Subsequent
accelerated, composite, and sharpness-aware variants further reinforce the value of correc-
tion terms in heterogeneous federated optimization [2, 4, 28, 29, 33]. The central limitation,
however, is shared across this line of work: the correction states are full-dimensional. Each
client must store and often communicate vectors in Rd , which creates a substantial mem-
ory and bandwidth burden for modern large models [9, 18, 31]. Our paper is motivated
by preserving the robustness of this line while removing its full-dimensional systems cost.


2.2   Communication Compression and Error Feedback
A direct route to communication efficiency is to compress model updates using quantiza-
tion or sparsification [1, 13, 24]. These primitives can greatly reduce bits per round, but
aggressive compressors also introduce variance or deterministic bias. The now-standard
remedy is error feedback, which stores the discrepancy between the intended update and
its compressed version in a local residual buffer so that the lost information is gradually
reinjected into future rounds [21]. This principle underlies compressed local-SGD frame-
works and doubly compressed schemes such as Qsparse-local-SGD and DoubleSqueeze
[3, 22]. It has also been strengthened by analyses showing that momentum can further
improve error-feedback behavior [6].
     In federated learning, compression has been integrated with heterogeneity-aware
optimization in methods such as SCAFCOM and SCALLION, which combine controlled
averaging with compressed communication and obtain convergence guarantees under
arbitrary heterogeneity [7]. Adaptive compression strategies further tune this trade-off
online [23]. Nevertheless, this literature inherits a key structural limitation: error feedback
requires a full-dimensional residual buffer on each client, so the memory footprint still
scales with the ambient model dimension [3, 7, 21]. In that sense, compression often shifts
the bottleneck from raw communication to device memory rather than resolving both
simultaneously. Moreover, under non-IID data, local residuals can themselves evolve
heterogeneously, complicating their interaction with client drift. For our purposes, the
6                                       Anonymous / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 0 (2025), pp. 1-46


main lesson from this line is that reducing transmitted bits alone is not enough; one must
also control the dimension and persistence of the auxiliary state.


2.3   Subspace and Low-Rank Optimization Methods
A more holistic strategy is to reduce the dimension of the optimization process itself. In
centralized large-model training, low-rank projection methods such as GaLore show that
gradients and optimizer states can be maintained in low-dimensional subspaces while
preserving strong empirical performance [32]. Related survey materials emphasize a
broader geometric viewpoint in which projection, preconditioning, and low-rank structure
jointly reshape the optimization problem so as to trade off computation, communication,
and memory more effectively. In federated settings, this idea gives rise to subspace
and low-rank algorithms that project client updates, communicate only low-dimensional
coordinates, or optimize within low-rank parameterizations [14, 19, 30]. Greedy low-rank
compression methods in distributed optimization further illustrate that structured low-
rank communication can admit convergence guarantees when combined with appropriate
correction mechanisms [5].
    The advantage of this line is triple efficiency: local computation is reduced because
updates are formed in an r-dimensional space, communication is reduced because only
projected quantities are transmitted, and memory is reduced because optimizer or auxil-
iary states can be maintained in low-dimensional coordinates. However, the survey assets
also make clear that existing subspace methods generally prioritize efficiency over hetero-
geneity robustness. Some methods employ dual variables or heuristic correctors, but they
do not furnish a SCAFFOLD-style, theoretically grounded variance-reduction mechanism
in the same evolving low-dimensional space [30]. This is the key incompatibility. Classical
control variates are static and full-dimensional, whereas practical subspace methods often
rely on dynamic or periodically refreshed bases. When the active subspace changes, a
naive full-dimensional correction is either too costly to preserve or becomes misaligned
with the new coordinates. Thus, the historical information required for effective drift
correction is either retained at full cost or lost during subspace transitions.


2.4   Positioning of This Work
Our work is positioned exactly in the gap exposed by the above taxonomy. Variance-
reduction methods offer robustness but pay full-dimensional memory and communication
costs; compression methods reduce transmitted bits but still rely on full-dimensional
auxiliary buffers; and subspace methods offer holistic efficiency but lack a native, theoreti-
cally principled mechanism for correcting client drift under heterogeneity. The objective
of Subspace-SCAFFOLD is to bridge these lines by co-designing subspace optimization
and heterogeneity correction so that variance-reduction information is maintained con-
sistently with the low-dimensional optimization geometry rather than appended as an
incompatible full-dimensional afterthought. In this sense, our work is not merely another
Anonymous / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 0 (2025), pp. 1-46                                7


compressed or low-rank FL method: it aims to recover the robustness guarantees associ-
ated with SCAFFOLD while preserving the subspace efficiency required in large-model
federated learning. The theoretical development is given in Section 4, and the empirical
consequences of this design are evaluated in Section 5.



3 Methodology

This section presents the methodology of Subspace-SCAFFOLD (SSF), including the
problem setup, the algorithmic intuition, the main procedure, and the key implementation
and complexity considerations. Our goal is to reduce the communication dimension from
d to r while retaining the drift-correction mechanism of SCAFFOLD through projected
updates and a residual-preserving backfill step in the ambient space.


3.1   Problem setup and motivation

We consider federated optimization over N clients. At each round, Subspace-SCAFFOLD
introduces a shared random orthogonal projector Pt ∈ O(Rr×d ) so that all local updates
and communicated quantities are restricted to an r-dimensional working subspace, while
the global model and control variables remain represented in the full ambient space.
    To ground the discussion, we first present a matrix-regression formulation that serves
as a controlled analytical and experimental model. The global parameter is a matrix
X ∈ Rd×m . Client i holds data ( Ai ,Bi ) and minimizes

                                   1            2   λ   2
                      fi (X ) =       Ai X − Bi F +   X F,           i = 1,..., N,   (3.1)
                                  2ni               2

while the global objective is
                                                  1 N
                                                  N i∑
                                        F(X ) =         f i ( X ).                   (3.2)
                                                     =1

The data are heterogeneous across clients through feature-distribution shift: each client
has its own mean vector and therefore its own local curvature and minimizer. This
heterogeneity is the source of client drift.
   The methodological motivation is straightforward. Standard FedAvg aggregates local
model changes but does not explicitly correct the discrepancy between local and global
gradient information. Full-dimensional SCAFFOLD addresses this issue by maintaining
global and local control variates, but its memory and communication cost scales with the
ambient dimension. SSF seeks to preserve the same correction mechanism while restricting
communication and active-device state transfer to a lower-dimensional random subspace.
8                                              Anonymous / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 0 (2025), pp. 1-46


3.2   Subspace projection and backfill mechanism
Let Pt ∈ Rr×d be a shared orthonormal projection operator at round t, with
                                               Pt Pt⊤ = Ir ,                                      (3.3)
and let
                                               Pt := Pt⊤ Pt                                       (3.4)
be the corresponding orthogonal projector in Rd . For any full-space vector x ∈ Rd , we
decompose it into its projected and residual parts:
                         xproj = Pt x,       xres = x − Pt⊤ xproj = ( I −Pt ) x.                  (3.5)
The same decomposition is applied to the global control variate ct and to each client
control variate cit .
   The key modeling idea is that optimization work is done only on the projected co-
ordinates. Local iterates evolve in Rr , gradients are projected through Pt , and server
aggregation also takes place in the subspace. After the projected update is computed, the
method restores a full-space model by backfilling the preserved residual part:
                                         x t+1 = Pt⊤ xproj
                                                      t +1    t
                                                           + xres .                               (3.6)

This backfill mechanism is one of the defining ingredients of SSF: it enables subspace
communication without discarding the ambient-space representation of the iterate.

3.3   Algorithmic intuition
The algorithmic design follows two complementary principles.
     First, as in SCAFFOLD, each client performs locally corrected stochastic-gradient steps.
In full rank, the correction takes the form gi − cit + ct , where cit tracks the local gradient and
ct tracks the global gradient. In SSF, the same correction is applied after projection into
the active subspace. This suppresses client drift in the communicated directions while
keeping the local and global correction terms dimension-compatible with the subspace
iterate.
     Second, unlike purely subspace-dual methods, SSF preserves a full-dimensional control
state. Only the current subspace component is refreshed using new gradient information,
whereas the orthogonal complement is carried forward unchanged. Concretely, the global
control update has the form

                                            1 N −1 K−1 ⊤ t,k t
                                           NK i∑   ∑ Pt Pt gi + cres ,
                                c t +1 =                                                          (3.7)
                                               =0 k =0

with the analogous client update

                                                            1 ⊤ K−1 t,k
                              cit+1 = ( I − Pt⊤ Pt )cit +    P Pt ∑ gi .                          (3.8)
                                                            K t   k =0
Anonymous / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 0 (2025), pp. 1-46                                              9


Hence, only the projected component is replaced, whereas the residual component is
preserved. This residual-preserving update allows SSF to accumulate dual information
across multiple rounds and multiple subspaces, rather than confining itself to a fixed
low-rank dual representation.
    This methodology rests on three ingredients: a shared random subspace projection,
projected SCAFFOLD-style control updates, and a backfill mechanism that restores a full-
space iterate after each subspace update. In contrast, FedSub keeps only subspace dual
variables and may therefore lose information when the projector changes, whereas SSF
stores the control state in the full space and communicates only its projected component.
This distinction is central to the implementation rationale.

3.4   Main algorithm
For completeness, we present the core algorithm analyzed in this paper.

Algorithm 1 Subspace SCAFFOLD
Require: Initial model x0 , control variables {c0i }iN=1 , c0 ; learning rates ηl , ηg ; local steps K;
  clients S; subspace dim. r; rounds T
  Initialize subspace projector: obtain P0 ∈ O(Rr×d ) by common random seed
  for t = 0, ··· ,T − 1 do
      Decompose model and control: x tproj = Pt x t , xres   t = x t − P⊤ x t , ct
                                                                         t proj
                                                                                               t   t
                                                                                    proj = Pt c , cres =
  ct − Pt⊤ ctproj
      for all client i in parallel do
                                   t
           Client control split: ci,proj = Pt cit , ci,res
                                                     t     = cit − Pt⊤ ci,proj
                                                                        t

                      t,0
          Initialize yi,proj = xtproj
          for k = 0,...,K − 1 do
              Reconstruct full model: yit,k = Pt⊤ yi,proj
                                                   t,k       t
                                                          + xres
            Compute mini-batch gradient: git,k = ∇ F (yit,k ;ξ it,k )
                                          t,k +1     t,k
            Update projected model: yi,proj      = yi,proj − ηl ( Pt git,k − ci,proj
                                                                              t      + ctproj )
         end for
         Update client control: cit+1 = ( I − Pt⊤ Pt )cit + K1 Pt⊤ Pt ∑kK=−01 git,k
      end for                                                        t,K
                                  +1                        ηK      xt   −y
      Update projected model: x tproj = xtproj − ηg Nl ∑i projηl Ki,proj
                                             +1                     N −1 K −1 ⊤       t,k
     Backfill to full space: x t+1 = Pt⊤ x tproj    t , c t +1 = 1
                                                 + xres                                    t
                                                                NK ∑i =0 ∑k =0 Pt Pt gi + cres
     Update projector: generate new Pt+1 for next round
  end for


3.5   Pseudocode-level implementation view
At a schematic level, each round consists of the following four stages.
10                                       Anonymous / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 0 (2025), pp. 1-46


Stage 1: projector generation and decomposition. A common random seed generates
the shared projector Pt . The server decomposes the full model and control variables
into projected and residual components. Only the projected pieces are prepared for
communication.

Stage 2: local projected updates. For each sampled client, the server first splits the local
control variable into projected and residual parts. The client initializes a projected iterate
from the broadcast subspace model, reconstructs the corresponding full model at each
local step, computes a stochastic gradient in the ambient space, projects that gradient back
into the subspace, and performs a SCAFFOLD-corrected projected update.

Stage 3: projected aggregation. After K local steps, the server aggregates the projected
client endpoints exactly in the FedAvg style but entirely inside the r-dimensional subspace.

Stage 4: full-space backfill and control refresh. The server lifts the projected model back
to the ambient space by combining the new projected coordinates with the old residual.
The global and client control variates are then refreshed only on the active subspace and
keep their orthogonal complements unchanged.
    The implementation notes also stress a practical distinction between SSF and Fed-
Sub. FedSub updates and rotates only subspace dual variables, while SSF stores full-
dimensional controls on the CPU and computes low-dimensional projections for commu-
nication. This design is heavier than FedSub in raw storage, but it avoids the structural
information loss caused by repeated subspace-only dual rotations.

3.6   Implementation considerations
Several implementation choices are important for a robust realization of SSF.

Shared projector generation. The projector is constructed from a common seed, often
by sampling a Gaussian random matrix and orthonormalizing it via QR decomposition.
This guarantees that all clients use the same subspace in a given round without explicitly
transmitting a dense random basis every time.

Projected communication only. The communicated objects are the subspace coordinates,
         t , projected local endpoints, and projected control terms. This reduces the
such as xproj
communication payload from order d to order r per vector-valued quantity.

Full-space control storage with low-dimensional transfer. The full control variables can
be stored on the CPU. For each round, the server computes their projected versions and
transfers only those projected quantities to the GPU. The orthogonal residual components
Anonymous / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 0 (2025), pp. 1-46                                 11


remain on CPU memory and are accessed only when the projector changes or when the
full-space control variable is explicitly reconstructed.

Projector refresh. The methodology allows the projector to change over time. In the
baseline algorithm analyzed here this happens every round, although the refresh frequency
can also be treated as a tunable implementation parameter. Refreshing more often increases
directional coverage in the ambient space, while refreshing less often may reduce overhead
and stabilize short-term local progress within a fixed subspace.

3.7   Complexity and practical trade-offs
The matrix-regression formulation also provides a concise complexity picture that extends
naturally to vector-valued formulations.

Computation. All compared methods require local stochastic-gradient evaluation. In
the matrix-regression setting, the per-client cost scales as

                                            O(Kndm).

SSF adds projection and reconstruction operations of order

                                            O(Kdrm).

When r ≪ d, this extra projection overhead is modest relative to gradient computation.

Memory. The full model always costs Θ(dm) storage. Full SCAFFOLD stores full-
dimensional global and client control variates, which costs Θ( Ndm) overall. SSF still
maintains full-dimensional control variables, but they can remain on CPU memory; the
GPU needs only the projected controls of size Θ(rm) together with the subspace basis of
size Θ(dr ). FedSub is lighter because its dual and endpoint states are only Θ( Nrm), but
that reduction comes with the information-loss mechanism discussed above.

Communication. The main systems advantage of SSF is that per-round communication
scales with the subspace dimension. Full-dimensional methods exchange objects of size
Θ(dm), whereas SSF communicates only projected quantities of size Θ(rm). Thus the
effective communication cost is reduced by a factor on the order of r/d.

Trade-off between compression and fidelity. Smaller r yields larger communication
savings but can weaken the approximation of full-space stationarity, while larger r im-
proves optimization fidelity at higher communication cost. SSF is designed to navigate
this trade-off more robustly than purely subspace-dual alternatives because it preserves a
full-space control memory across rounds.
12                                             Anonymous / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 0 (2025), pp. 1-46


3.8   Summary of the methodological position
Taken together, SSF is a subspace-restricted variant of SCAFFOLD that preserves the
essential drift-correction structure of the full-dimensional method. Its defining ingredients
are a shared random projector, projected local SCAFFOLD updates, backfill from the
active subspace to the ambient space, and full-space control memory with subspace-only
refresh. These ingredients jointly explain why the method can reduce communication and
active-device memory from ambient dimension d to working dimension r while remaining
substantially closer to full SCAFFOLD than lighter subspace baselines.


4     Theory
This section presents the theoretical analysis of SSF. We begin with the standing assump-
tions and notation, and then give the full sequence of lemmas, the main convergence
theorem, and the harmonic-stepsize corollary. The theorem, lemma, corollary, and proof
materials are included in full, with labels preserved exactly.

4.1   Assumptions
Assumption 1 (L-smoothness). Each client loss Fi : Rd → R satisfies ∥∇ Fi ( x )−∇ Fi (y)∥ ≤
L∥ x − y∥ for all x,y.

Assumption 2 (Bounded variance and independence across samples). For stochastic
gradients gi ( x;ξ ), E[ gi ( x;ξ ) | x ] = ∇ Fi ( x ) and E∥ gi ( x;ξ )−∇ Fi ( x )∥2 ≤ σ2 . In addition, all
stochastic gradient noises gi ( x;ξ )−∇ Fi ( x ) are independent across different clients i.

Assumption 3 (Shared random subspace). In each outer round k, all clients use the same
orthonormal Pk ∈ O(Rr×d ), with Pk Pk⊤ = Ir and EPk [ Pk⊤ Pk ] = (r/d) Id .

4.2   Notation and projector geometry
We summarize the notation that will be used throughout the analysis.

Dimensions and subspace ratio. We denote by d the ambient dimension and by r the
dimension of the random working subspace. The corresponding subspace ratio is
                                                  r
                                              ρ := ∈ (0,1].
                                                  d

Random subspace projector. In each outer round t, all clients share the same random
orthonormal matrix Pt ∈ Rr×d as in Assumption 3, with Pt Pt⊤ = Ir and EPt [ Pt⊤ Pt ] = (r/d) Id .
We write
                                   Pt := Pt⊤ Pt ∈ Rd×d
Anonymous / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 0 (2025), pp. 1-46                                               13


for the associated orthogonal projector onto the random r-dimensional subspace.
    Unless otherwise stated, expectations E[·] are taken with respect to the joint random-
ness of the projector Pt , the sampled clients, and all stochastic gradients in the correspond-
ing round.

4.3    Gradient and variance bounds
Lemma 4.1 (Gradient and Variance Bounds). Suppose Assumption 2 holds. Let gi ( x;ξ ) be
the stochastic gradient computed by client i at model parameter x with random seed ξ. Then the
following properties hold:

   1. Unbiasedness: E[ gi ( x;ξ ) | x ] = ∇ Fi ( x ).

   2. Bounded Variance: E[∥ gi ( x;ξ )−∇ Fi ( x )∥2 | x ] ≤ σ2 .

   3. Bounded Second Moment: E[∥ gi ( x;ξ )∥2 | x ] ≤ ∥∇ Fi ( x )∥2 + σ2 .

   4. Projected Variance: For any fixed matrix P (or random matrix P independent of ξ) with
      spectral norm ∥ P∥2 ≤ 1,

                                      E[∥ P( gi ( x;ξ )−∇ Fi ( x ))∥2 | x,P] ≤ σ2 .

Proof. The first two properties are restatements of Assumption 2.
   For the third property (Bounded Second Moment), we apply the bias-variance decom-
position:

 E[∥ gi ( x;ξ )∥2 | x ] = E[∥ gi ( x;ξ )−∇ Fi ( x )+∇ Fi ( x )∥2 | x ]
                      = E[∥ gi ( x;ξ )−∇ Fi ( x )∥2 | x ]+∥∇ Fi ( x )∥2
                        + 2⟨E[ gi ( x;ξ )−∇ Fi ( x ) | x ], ∇ Fi ( x )⟩
                      = E[∥ gi ( x;ξ )−∇ Fi ( x )∥2 | x ]+∥∇ Fi ( x )∥2    (since the cross term is zero)
                          2                2
                      ≤ σ +∥∇ Fi ( x )∥ .

   For the fourth property (Projected Variance), let v = gi ( x;ξ )−∇ Fi ( x ). Conditioned on
x and P, we have:

                      E[∥ Pv∥2 | x,P] ≤ E[∥ P∥22 ∥v∥2 | x,P] ≤ 12 · E[∥v∥2 | x ] ≤ σ2 .

This concludes the proof.

4.4    Client drift bound in subspace
Lemma 4.2 (Client Drift Bound in Subspace). Suppose Assumptions 1 (L-smoothness) and 2
(bounded variance and independence across samples and local steps) hold, and the local learning
14                                                   Anonymous / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 0 (2025), pp. 1-46


                     1
rate satisfies ηl ≤ 2KL . For any client i and outer round t, define

                                                  K −1
                                                      t,k                           2
                                         Ei,t := ∑ E yi,proj    t
                                                             − xproj .
                                                   k =0

Then
                                                                                                2
                              Ei,t ≤ 6K2 ηl2 σ2 + 12K3 ηl2 ∇ Fi ( x t )− cit + ct                   .               (4.1)
In particular, the noise-induced part of the client drift scales as O(K2 ηl2 σ2 ) thanks to the inde-
pendence of stochastic gradient noises across local steps for the same client within a round (see
Assumption 2).

Proof. Fix a round t and a client i, and write P = Pt for brevity. Recall the projected local
          t,k                              t,0
iterates yi,proj ∈ Rr with initialization yi,proj    t , and define
                                                  = xproj

                                    ∆it,k := yi,proj
                                              t,k       t
                                                     − xproj ,            k = 0,1,...,K.

Then ∆it,0 = 0, and the projected update is
                                  t,k +1    t,k                                  
                                 yi,proj = yi,proj − ηl Pgit,k − ci,proj
                                                                  t         t
                                                                         + cproj   ,

where git,k = ∇ Fi (yit,k ;ξ it,k ) and yit,k = P⊤ yi,proj
                                                    t,k       t .
                                                           + xres

Step 1: Decomposition into deterministic drift and noise.                                       Introduce the single-step
gradient noise
                               ξ it,k := git,k −∇ Fi (yit,k ),

so that git,k = ∇ Fi (yit,k )+ ξ it,k and, by Assumption 2,

                                  E[ξ it,k | yit,k ] = 0,       E[∥ξ it,k ∥2 | yit,k ] ≤ σ2 .

Define the corrected direction

                                            dit,k := ∇ Fi (yit,k )− cit + ct .

The update for ∆it,k becomes

                                       ∆it,k+1 = ∆it,k − ηl Pdit,k − ηl Pξ it,k .

Unrolling from k = 0 and using ∆it,0 = 0 yields

                                                            k                  k
                                                                    t,j                 t,j
                                     ∆it,k+1 = −ηl ∑ Pdi − ηl ∑ Pξ i .                                              (4.2)
                                                          j =0               j =0
Anonymous / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 0 (2025), pp. 1-46                                                                                 15


Step 2: Basic quadratic split. From (4.2) and ∥ a + b∥2 ≤ 2∥ a∥2 + 2∥b∥2 , we have

                                                                   k                                         k
                                          2                                   t,j 2                              t,j 2
                        E ∆it,k+1             ≤ 2ηl2 E ∑ Pdi                            + 2ηl2 E ∑ Pξ i                  .             (4.3)
                                                                  j =0                                   j =0


This step does not use any independence across local steps; it is purely deterministic.


Step 3: Bounding the drift part (deterministic terms).                                                   Let m := k + 1. For any vectors
a0 ,...,am−1 ,
                                                     m −1          2          m −1
                                                      ∑ aj             ≤ m ∑ ∥ a j ∥2 .
                                                      j =0                      j =0

                                   t,j
Applying this with a j = Pdi and using ∥ Pv∥ ≤ ∥v∥, we get

                                                     k                           k
                                                             t,j 2                             t,j 2
                                          E         ∑ Pdi                ≤ m ∑ E di                      .                             (4.4)
                                                    j =0                        j =0


We have
                          t,j        t,j                                     
                         di = ∇ Fi (yi )−∇ Fi ( x t ) + ∇ Fi ( x t )− cit + ct .

Using ∥u + v∥2 ≤ 2∥u∥2 + 2∥v∥2 and L-smoothness (Assumption 1),

                       t,j                           t,j                          2                                          2
                     ∥di ∥2 ≤ 2 ∇ Fi (yi )−∇ Fi ( x t )                               + 2 ∇ Fi ( x t )− cit + ct
                                               t,j            2
                              ≤ 2L2 yi − x t                      + 2Gi,t ,

where
                                                                                                 2
                                              Gi,t := ∇ Fi ( x t )− cit + ct                         .
                             t,j              t,j
                                         t and x t = P ⊤ x t      t                   t                                          t,j     t,j
By the reconstruction yi = P⊤ yi,proj + xres                                              ⊤
                                                          proj + xres , we have yi − x = P ∆i
               t,j                 t,j
and hence ∥yi − x t ∥2 ≤ ∥∆i ∥2 . Therefore

                                                     t,j 2                        t,j
                                          E di               ≤ 2L2 E∥∆i ∥2 + 2Gi,t .

Substituting into (4.4),

                                     k                                    k
                                               t,j 2                                     t,j
                             E     ∑ Pdi                   ≤ 2L2 m ∑ E∥∆i ∥2 + 2m2 Gi,t .                                              (4.5)
                                   j =0                                  j =0
16                                                    Anonymous / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 0 (2025), pp. 1-46


Step 4: Bounding the noise part via conditional independence. Let Ht denote the
sigma-algebra generated by all randomness up to the beginning of round t, including
the projector P, the global iterate x t , and the control variates, but **before** sampling the
                        t,j
stochastic gradients {ξ i }Kj=−01 for that round. By Assumption (A2), conditioned on Ht the
                         t,j                                                                         t,j
noise variables {ξ i }kj=0 are independent, have zero mean and satisfy E[∥ξ i ∥2 | Ht ] ≤ σ2 .
We first compute the conditional second moment and then take a full expectation:

      k                h h k            ii
            t,j 2              t,j 2
E    ∑ Pξ i         = E E ∑ Pξ i     Ht                                                                     (4.6)
     j =0                       j =0
                       h k 
                                 t,j                                        t,j               i
                    = E ∑ E ∥ Pξ i ∥2 | Ht + 2           ∑             E ⟨ Pξ i ,Pξ it,ℓ ⟩ | Ht             (4.7)
                         j =0                          0≤ j<ℓ≤k
                       h k                i
                                 t,j
                    = E ∑ E ∥ Pξ i ∥2 | Ht    (cross terms vanish by conditional independence and zero mean)
                         j =0
                                                                                                            (4.8)
                        h k t,j              i
                    ≤ E ∑ E ∥ ξ i ∥2 | H t          ≤ mσ2 ,                                                 (4.9)
                         j =0


where we used ∥ Pv∥ ≤ ∥v∥ and the single-step variance bound in Assumption (A2).


Step 5: Recursion for ek := E∥∆it,k ∥2 . Combining the drift and noise bounds with (4.3),
we obtain
                                                         k                      
                        ek+1 := E∥∆it,k+1 ∥2 ≤ 2ηl2 2L2 m ∑ e j + 2m2 Gi,t + mσ2                           (4.10)
                                                                       j =0
                                                                   k
                                                = 4ηl2 L2 m ∑ e j + 4ηl2 m2 Gi,t + 2ηl2 mσ2 .              (4.11)
                                                               j =0


For k ≤ K − 1 we have m = k + 1 ≤ K, so m ≤ K and m2 ≤ K2 ; hence
                                                               k
                                                   ek+1 ≤ α ∑ e j + C,                                     (4.12)
                                                              j =0


with
                                  α := 4ηl2 L2 K,       C := 4ηl2 K2 Gi,t + 2ηl2 Kσ2 .
Let Sk := ∑kj=0 e j . Then S0 = e0 = 0 and

                                              Sk+1 ≤ (1 + α)Sk + C.
Anonymous / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 0 (2025), pp. 1-46                                         17


By induction,
                                         C                C
                                 Sk ≤      (1 + α ) k − 1 ≤ (1 + α ) k .
                                         α                 α
Using this in ek+1 ≤ αSk + C gives

                                            e k +1 ≤ C ( 1 + α ) k .

Under the stepsize condition ηl ≤ 1/(2KL) we have α = 4ηl2 L2 K ≤ 1/K, so (1 + α)k ≤
(1 + 1/K )K ≤ e < 3 for k ≤ K. Thus,

                       ek+1 ≤ 3C = 12ηl2 K2 Gi,t + 6ηl2 Kσ2 ,              0 ≤ k ≤ K − 1.     (4.13)

Step 6: Summing over local steps.            Finally,
                        K −1    K                                           
                  Ei,t = ∑ ek = ∑ ek ≤ K max ek ≤ K 12ηl2 K2 Gi,t + 6ηl2 Kσ2 ,
                        k =0      k =1         1≤ k ≤ K

which yields
                                                                       2
                          Ei,t ≤ 12K3 ηl2 ∇ Fi ( x t )− cit + ct           + 6K2 ηl2 σ2 .
This proves the claimed bound (4.1). Throughout the proof we used Assumption (A1) for
smoothness and Assumption (A2) both for single-step variance control and, crucially, for
the independence of the local noises {ξ it,k }k across steps within the same round, which is
what allows the noise term to scale as O(K2 ηl2 σ2 ) instead of O(K3 ηl2 σ2 ).

4.5   One-round progress
Lemma 4.3 (One-Round Progress). Suppose Assumptions 1–3 hold, and let the effective global
step size be η̃ := ηg ηl K. Define the average projected drift

                                            1 N K −1   t,k            2
                                           NK i∑  ∑ E yi,proj
                                t                                t
                               Edrift :=                      − xproj   ,
                                               =1 k =0

                                           1
which is controlled by Lemma 4.2. If η̃ ≤ 4L , then the one-round progress satisfies

                                          ρ η̃          2  Lη̃ 2 2 3L2 η̃ t
                 E F ( x t+1 ) ≤ F ( x t )−      ∇ F(xt ) +       σ +      Edrift .           (4.14)
                                             4              2NK       2
Here the expectation is taken over the randomness of the projector Pt , the sampled clients, and all
stochastic gradients in round t.
Proof. We first rewrite the global update in a form that makes the projected direction
explicit. From Algorithm 1, the projected local update on client i is
                           t,k +1    t,k                                    
                          yi,proj = yi,proj − ηl Pt git,k − ci,proj
                                                             t         t
                                                                    + cproj   ,
18                                               Anonymous / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 0 (2025), pp. 1-46


where git,k = ∇ Fi (yit,k ;ξ it,k ) and yit,k = Pt⊤ yi,proj
                                                     t,k       t . Unrolling over k = 0,...,K − 1 and using
                                                            + xres
 t,0       t
yi,proj = xproj gives
                                                 K −1                          
                                      t,K
                              t
                             xproj − yi,proj = ηl ∑ Pt git,k − ci,proj
                                                                t         t
                                                                       + cproj   .                  (4.15)
                                                   k =0

The projected global aggregation step reads

                                                                  t        t,K
                                                      ηl K N xproj − yi,proj
                                                       N i∑
                                 t +1    t
                                xproj = xproj − ηg                           .
                                                           =1
                                                                  ηl K

Substituting (4.15) and simplifying yields

                                              1 N t           t,K 
                          t +1
                         xproj    t
                               = xproj − ηg     ∑
                                              N i =1
                                                     xproj − yi,proj                                (4.16)

                                                 1 N K −1                               
                                 t
                              = xproj − η g ηl     ∑    ∑    Pt git,k − ci,proj
                                                                         t         t
                                                                                + cproj   .         (4.17)
                                                 N i =1 k =0

Define the averaged projected direction

                                     1 N K −1                             
                            vt :=      ∑   ∑   Pt git,k − ci,proj
                                                           t         t
                                                                  + cproj   ∈ Rr .
                                    NK i=1 k=0

Then
                                   t +1    t
                                  xproj = xproj − η̃vt ,         η̃ := ηg ηl K,

and the backfill step gives

                                  x t+1 = Pt⊤ xproj
                                               t +1    t
                                                    + xres = xt − η̃Pt⊤ vt .                        (4.18)

Using ∑iN=1 ci,proj
             t          t , the control variates cancel in v and we obtain
                    = Ncproj                                t


                                                  1 N K−1 t,k
                                                 NK i∑  ∑ Pt gi .
                                          vt =
                                                     =1 k =0


Using the orthogonal projector Pt onto the random r-dimensional subspace in Rd (see
Section 4.2), we have
                                          1 N K −1 
                             Pt⊤ vt = Pt
                                          NK i∑  ∑ git,k .                   (4.19)
                                              =1 k =0
Anonymous / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 0 (2025), pp. 1-46                                                  19


Decomposition into mean gradient and noise. Write the stochastic gradient as git,k =
∇ Fi (yit,k )+ ξ it,k , where by Assumption 2
                                                                             
                             E[ξ it,k | yit,k ] = 0,      E ∥ξ it,k ∥2 | yit,k ≤ σ2 ,

and the random noises {ξ it,k }i,k are independent across different clients i within the same
round t, as specified in Assumption 2. Define the averaged full gradients and noise in
round t:
                            1 N K −1            t,k               1 N K−1 t,k
                           NK i∑    ∑ i i                        NK i∑  ∑ ξi .
                    ḡt :=              ∇ F ( y     ) , ξ̄ t : =
                                =1 k =0                              =1 k =0

Then (4.19) becomes
                                             Pt⊤ vt = Pt ( ḡt + ξ̄ t ),                               (4.20)
so the full-space update (4.18) is

                                         x t+1 = x t − η̃ Pt ( ḡt + ξ̄ t ).                           (4.21)

Smoothness-based descent inequality.                   By L-smoothness of F (Assumption 1),

                                                                        L t +1         2
                F ( x t+1 ) ≤ F ( x t )+ ∇ F ( x t ),x t+1 − x t +         x − xt                      (4.22)
                                                                        2
                                                                           Lη̃ 2                   2
                          = F ( x t )− η̃ ∇ F ( x t ), Pt ( ḡt + ξ̄ t ) +       Pt ( ḡt + ξ̄ t ) .   (4.23)
                                                                            2
Denote Gt := ∇ F ( x t ). We decompose the right-hand side into the linear term

                                        T1 := −η̃ Gt , Pt ( ḡt + ξ̄ t )

and the quadratic term
                                                 Lη̃ 2                   2
                                         T2 :=         Pt ( ḡt + ξ̄ t ) .
                                                  2
We now bound E[ T1 ] and E[ T2 ].

Bounding the linear term T1 . We first note that x t is fixed before sampling Pt and the
stochastic gradients in round t. Using (4.21),

                                   T1 = −η̃ Gt , Pt ḡt − η̃ Gt , Pt ξ̄ t .                            (4.24)

Conditioned on the sigma-fields that encode the past iterates, each local noise has zero
conditional mean. More precisely, let Ft be the sigma-algebra generated by all randomness
up to the beginning of round t (so that x t , Gt and Pt are Ft -measurable), and for each
client i and local step k let Ft,i,k be the sigma-algebra generated by Ft together with all
20                                              Anonymous / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 0 (2025), pp. 1-46


local iterates up to step k on all clients. Then yit,k is Ft,i,k -measurable and Assumption (A2)
implies E[ξ it,k | Ft,i,k ] = 0. Using the tower property, we get

                                        1 N K −1                       
                   E ⟨ Gt , Pt ξ̄ t ⟩ =      ∑  ∑    E ⟨ Gt , Pt ξ it,k ⟩
                                         NK i=1 k=0
                                          1 N K −1 h                     t,k             i
                                         NK i∑  ∑
                                       =             E E  ⟨  G t , P   ξ
                                                                      t i     ⟩ | F t,i,k
                                             =1 k =0
                                          1 N K −1 h                                       i
                                       =     ∑  ∑    E Gt , Pt E[ξ it,k | Ft,i,k ] = 0.
                                         NK i=1 k=0

For the gradient part, decompose

                                            ḡt = Gt +( ḡt − Gt ).

Then
                                                                               
                       E[ T1 ] = −η̃E ⟨ Gt , Pt Gt ⟩ − η̃E ⟨ Gt , Pt ( ḡt − Gt )⟩ .              (4.25)

Using Assumption (A3), E[Pt ] = ρId with ρ = r/d, so
                                      
                       E ⟨ Gt , Pt Gt ⟩ = ⟨ Gt ,E[Pt ] Gt ⟩ = ρ ∥ Gt ∥2 .

For the second term, we use Cauchy–Schwarz and Young’s inequality together with
∥Pt z∥ ≤ ∥z∥ and E∥Pt Gt ∥2 = ρ ∥ Gt ∥2 :
                                                                   
                  −E ⟨ Gt , Pt ( ḡt − Gt )⟩ = −E ⟨Pt Gt , ḡt − Gt ⟩       (4.26)
                                               1                1
                                              ≤ E∥Pt Gt ∥2 + E∥ ḡt − Gt ∥2 (4.27)
                                               2                2
                                               ρ         1
                                              = ∥ Gt ∥2 + E∥ ḡt − Gt ∥2 .  (4.28)
                                               2         2
Combining the two pieces, we obtain
                                             ρη̃          η̃
                               E[ T1 ] ≤ −       ∥ Gt ∥2 + E∥ ḡt − Gt ∥2 .                       (4.29)
                                              2           2
We now bound the bias term E∥ ḡt − Gt ∥2 by the drift. Observe that

                                          1 N K −1                            
                            ḡt − Gt =      ∑   ∑   ∇ Fi (yit,k )−∇ Fi ( x t ) .
                                         NK i=1 k=0

By Jensen’s inequality and L-smoothness,

                                            1 N K −1                         2
                         ∥ ḡt − Gt ∥2 ≤
                                           NK i∑  ∑ ∇ Fi (yit,k )−∇ Fi (xt )                      (4.30)
                                               =1 k =0
Anonymous / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 0 (2025), pp. 1-46                                              21



                                              L2 N K−1 t,k      2
                                              NK i∑  ∑ yi − x t .
                                         ≤                                                         (4.31)
                                                  =1 k =0

The reconstruction formulas yit,k = Pt⊤ yi,proj
                                         t,k       t and x t = P⊤ x t
                                                + xres                    t          t,k  t
                                                                t proj + xres imply yi − x =
      t,k       t ), so
Pt⊤ (yi,proj − xproj

                                                                       2                     2
                     ∥yit,k − x t ∥2 = Pt⊤ (yi,proj
                                             t,k       t
                                                    − xproj )                 t,k
                                                                           ≤ yi,proj    t
                                                                                     − xproj .

                                                 t
Taking expectations and using the definition of Edrift , we get

                                             E∥ ḡt − Gt ∥2 ≤ L2 Edrift
                                                                  t
                                                                        .                          (4.32)

Substituting into (4.29),
                                                      ρη̃           η̃L2 t
                                   E[ T1 ] ≤ −            ∥ Gt ∥2 +     E .                        (4.33)
                                                       2              2 drift

Bounding the quadratic term T2 .               We have

                                        Lη̃ 2                      2
                              E[ T2 ] =       E Pt ( ḡt + ξ̄ t )                                  (4.34)
                                         2
                                        Lη̃ 2            2     Lη̃ 2           2
                                      =       E Pt ḡt +             E Pt ξ̄ t ,                   (4.35)
                                         2                       2
where we used that the mixed term E⟨Pt ḡt , Pt ξ̄ t ⟩ vanishes. Indeed, expanding ξ̄ t and
using the same filtration Ft,i,k as above,

                                         1 N K −1                          
                 E ⟨Pt ḡt , Pt ξ̄ t ⟩ =      ∑  ∑    E ⟨Pt ḡt , Pt ξ it,k ⟩
                                          NK i=1 k=0
                                           1 N K −1 h                        t,k             i
                                          NK i∑  ∑
                                        =             E E ⟨P      ḡ
                                                                t t  , P   ξ
                                                                          t i     ⟩ | F t,i,k
                                              =1 k =0
                                           1 N K −1 h                                          i
                                        =     ∑  ∑    E Pt ḡt , Pt E[ξ it,k | Ft,i,k ] = 0.
                                          NK i=1 k=0

    Gradient part. Using ḡt = Gt +( ḡt − Gt ) and the inequality ∥ a + b∥2 ≤ 2∥ a∥2 + 2∥b∥2 ,
                                         2                   2                           2
                                Pt ḡt       ≤ 2 Pt Gt           + 2 Pt ( ḡt − Gt )               (4.36)
                                                             2                   2
                                             ≤ 2 Pt Gt           + 2 ḡt − Gt        .             (4.37)

Taking expectations and using E∥Pt Gt ∥2 = ρ ∥ Gt ∥2 and E∥ ḡt − Gt ∥2 ≤ L2 Edrift
                                                                              t     , we obtain
                                                  2
                                   E Pt ḡt           ≤ 2ρ ∥ Gt ∥2 + 2L2 Edrift
                                                                          t
                                                                                .                  (4.38)
22                                                 Anonymous / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 0 (2025), pp. 1-46


   Noise part (using independence across clients and local steps). Conditioned on Pt , let Σξ̄ | Pt
denote the (conditional) covariance matrix of ξ̄ t . Then
                                                                       
                            E ∥Pt ξ̄ t ∥2 | Pt = E ξ̄ t⊤ Pt⊤ Pt ξ̄ t | Pt                 (4.39)
                                                               
                                                = tr Pt Σξ̄ | Pt .                        (4.40)

Using ∥Pt ∥2 ≤ 1 and the fact that Σξ̄ | Pt is positive semi-definite,
                                                                                          
                  tr(Pt Σξ̄ | Pt ) ≤ ∥Pt ∥2 tr(Σξ̄ | Pt ) ≤ tr(Σξ̄ | Pt ) = E ∥ξ̄ t ∥2 | Pt .
Taking expectations over Pt gives the general bound
                                                          2                  2
                                              E Pt ξ̄ t       ≤ E ξ̄ t           ,                   (4.41)
which does not require any independence between Pt and the gradient noise.
    To bound E∥ξ̄ t ∥2 , we now use the conditional independence across both clients and
local steps in Assumption (A2). Let Ht denote the sigma-algebra generated by the past
iterates up to the beginning of round t. Then, conditioned on Ht , the family {ξ it,k }i,k is
independent, mean-zero, and satisfies E[∥ξ it,k ∥2 | Ht ] ≤ σ2 . By definition,

                                       2       1 N K−1 t,k 2
                                              NK i∑  ∑ ξi
                              E ξ̄ t       =E                                                        (4.42)
                                                  =1 k =0
                                             1    h N K −1          2i
                                           = 2 2 E ∑ ∑ ξ it,k                                        (4.43)
                                            N K     i =1 k =0

                                             1    h    N K −1         2   i
                                           = 2 2 E E ∑ ∑ ξ it,k          Ht .                        (4.44)
                                            N K           i =1 k =0

Inside the inner expectation, conditional independence and zero mean yield cancellation
of all cross terms, so
                                     1     h N K −1         i
                               2
                        E ξ̄ t = 2 2 E ∑ ∑ E ∥ξ it,k ∥2 Ht                        (4.45)
                                  N K       i =1 k =0
                                     1     h          i σ2
                                 ≤ 2 2 E NKσ2 =            .                      (4.46)
                                  N K                   NK
Combining with (4.41), we obtain
                                                              2       σ2
                                                E Pt ξ̄ t         ≤      .                           (4.47)
                                                                      NK
     Putting (4.38) and (4.47) together, we get
                                                                             
                                    Lη̃ 2             2        2 t         σ2
                          E[ T2 ] ≤          2ρ ∥ Gt ∥ + 2L Edrift +                                 (4.48)
                                     2                                    NK
                                                                        Lη̃ 2 2
                                  = Lη̃ 2 ρ ∥ Gt ∥2 + L3 η̃ 2 Edrift
                                                               t
                                                                     +       σ .                     (4.49)
                                                                       2NK
Anonymous / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 0 (2025), pp. 1-46                                              23


Combining T1 and T2 .        Combining (4.33) and (4.49), we obtain
                                                ρη̃
                     E F ( x t+1 )− F ( x t ) ≤ − ∥ Gt ∥2 + Lη̃ 2 ρ ∥ Gt ∥2                       (4.50)
                                                   2
                                                   η̃L2                    Lη̃ 2 2
                                                +        + L3 η̃ 2 Edrift
                                                                    t
                                                                          +       σ .             (4.51)
                                                      2                     2NK
The coefficient of ∥ Gt ∥2 can be written as
                                                      1        
                                               −ρη̃        − Lη̃ .
                                                       2
                                    1
Under the step-size condition η̃ ≤ 4L , we have 21 − Lη̃ ≥ 14 , hence
                                               ρη̃              ρη̃
                                           −       + Lη̃ 2 ρ ≤ − .                                (4.52)
                                                2                4
For the drift term, note that
                  η̃L2             η̃L2               η̃L2                 3η̃L2 3η̃L2
                       + L3 η̃ 2 =      (1 + 2Lη̃ ) ≤      (1 + 2 · 14 ) =      ≤      .
                    2                2                  2                    4     2
Therefore,
                                       ρη̃                Lη̃ 2 2 3L2 η̃ t
             E F ( x t+1 )− F ( x t ) ≤ − ∥∇ F ( x t )∥2 +       σ +      Edrift .
                                          4                2NK       2
Rearranging yields the claimed bound (4.14). This completes the proof.

4.6   Control variate contraction
Lemma 4.4 (Control Variate Contraction). Suppose Assumptions 1–3 hold, and that the local
stepsize satisfies ηl ≤ 1/(2KL) so that Lemma 4.2 applies. Define the control-variate error

                                            1 N                       2
                                            N i∑
                                    Ct :=         E cit −∇ Fi ( x t ) ,
                                               =1

and the averaged projected drift as in Lemma 4.3,

                                            1 N K −1     t,k            2
                                t
                               Edrift :=      ∑   ∑
                                           NK i=1 k=0
                                                      E yi,proj    t
                                                                − xproj   .

Let η̃ := ηg ηl K be the effective global stepsize. Then, for every round t, the control variates satisfy
                            ρ     σ2
                   Ct+1 ≤ 1 − Ct + 3 + 3L2 Edrift t
                             2      K
                                                                                                  (4.53)
                             12L2 2             2   6L2 η̃ 2 σ2 12L4 2 t
                           +     η̃ ∇ F ( x t ) +              +    η̃ Edrift .
                               ρ                     ρ NK        ρ
In particular, Ct contracts by a factor 1 − ρ/2 up to perturbation terms that depend on the stochastic
variance σ2 , the drift Edrift
                         t     , and the model movement η̃ 2 ∥∇ F ( x t )∥2 .
24                                                Anonymous / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 0 (2025), pp. 1-46


Proof. Fix an outer round t and a client i. Write vi∗ := ∇ Fi ( x t ) for the reference gradient at
the beginning of round t. We first track the evolution of cit+1 with respect to the frozen
reference vi∗ , then relate vi∗ to the new reference ∇ Fi ( x t+1 ).

Step 1: Subspace decomposition of the control update. From Algorithm 1 and the
projector Pt defined in Section 4.2, the control update is
                                                                  1 K −1          
                                                                               t,k
                                 cit+1 = ( I −Pt )cit +Pt
                                                                   K k =0   ∑ i ,
                                                                             g                      (4.54)


where git,k = ∇ Fi (yit,k ;ξ it,k ) is the stochastic gradient at local step k on client i. Using
vi∗ = ( I −Pt )vi∗ +Pt vi∗ , we obtain
                                                                         1 K −1              
                                                                               gt,k − vi∗ .
                                                                            K ∑ i
                       cit+1 − vi∗ = ( I −Pt )(cit − vi∗ )+Pt                                       (4.55)
                                                                              k =0

Define
                          Ai := ( I −Pt )(cit − vi∗ ),             Bi := Pt ( ḡit − vi∗ ),
where ḡit := K1 ∑kK=−01 git,k . For a fixed projector Pt , we have Ai ∈ ker(Pt ) and Bi ∈ range(Pt ),
and therefore Ai ⊥ Bi . Hence
                                                      2
                                      cit+1 − vi∗         = ∥ Ai ∥2 +∥ Bi ∥2 .                      (4.56)

Step 2: Contraction in the orthogonal complement via (A3). Conditioning on the
history up to the beginning of round t, both cit and vi∗ are fixed before sampling Pt . Taking
expectation over Pt and using Assumption 3,
                                                                             
                        EPt ∥ Ai ∥2 = EPt (cit − vi∗ )⊤ ( I −Pt )(cit − vi∗ )            (4.57)
                                        t    ∗ ⊤
                                                                  t       ∗
                                    = (ci − vi ) I − EPt [Pt ] (ci − vi )                (4.58)
                                                                    2
                                        = (1 − ρ) cit − vi∗             .                           (4.59)

Taking full expectation we obtain
                                                                                     2
                                E∥ Ai ∥2 = (1 − ρ) E cit −∇ Fi ( x t )                   .          (4.60)

Step 3: Bounding the projected gradient error Bi using (A1) and (A2). We decompose
the error in ḡit into a stochastic noise part and a drift part. Write

                                          git,k = ∇ Fi (yit,k )+ ξ it,k ,

where, by Assumption 2,
                                                                               
                            E[ξ it,k | yit,k ] = 0,         E ∥ξ it,k ∥2 | yit,k ≤ σ2 ,
Anonymous / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 0 (2025), pp. 1-46                                               25


and the noises {ξ it,k } are independent across different local steps k on the same client and
across different clients. Define

                               1 K−1 t,k                      1 K −1                           
                                                                     ∇ Fi (yit,k )−∇ Fi ( x t ) .
                               K k∑                             ∑
                     ξ̄ i :=         ξi ,            δ̄i :=
                                  =0
                                                              K k =0

Then
                                  ḡit − vi∗ = ξ̄ i + δ̄i ,        Bi = Pt (ξ̄ i + δ̄i ).
Using ∥u + v∥2 ≤ 2∥u∥2 + 2∥v∥2 and ∥Pt z∥ ≤ ∥z∥, we get

                  E∥ Bi ∥2 ≤ 2E∥Pt ξ̄ i ∥2 + 2E∥Pt δ̄i ∥2 ≤ 2E∥Pt ξ̄ i ∥2 + 2E∥δ̄i ∥2 .             (4.61)

    Noise part. Condition on Pt and let Σξ̄ i | Pt be the conditional covariance of ξ̄ i . Then
                                                              
                          E ∥Pt ξ̄ i ∥2 | Pt = tr Pt Σξ̄ i | Pt                                     (4.62)
                                                                                             
                                                     ≤ ∥Pt ∥2 tr Σξ̄ i | Pt ≤ tr Σξ̄ i | Pt         (4.63)
                                                                     
                                                     = E ∥ξ̄ i ∥2 | Pt .                            (4.64)

Taking expectation over Pt yields the general bound

                                                 E∥Pt ξ̄ i ∥2 ≤ E∥ξ̄ i ∥2 .                         (4.65)

By independence of the local noises across k (Assumption 2),

                                                          1 K−1 t,k 2
                                                          K k∑
                                        E∥ξ̄ i ∥2 = E           ξi                                  (4.66)
                                                             =0
                                                       1 K −1       t,k 2   σ2
                                                       K2 k∑
                                                   ≤          E ∥ ξ i  ∥  ≤    .                    (4.67)
                                                           =0
                                                                            K

Combining with (4.65),
                                                 σ2
                                                    E∥Pt ξ̄ i ∥2 ≤
                                                    .                                               (4.68)
                                                  K
    Drift part. By Jensen’s inequality and L-smoothness (Assumption 1),

                                        2        1 K −1                             2
                                  δ̄i       =      ∑    ∇ Fi (yit,k )−∇ Fi ( x t )                  (4.69)
                                                 K k =0
                                                1 K −1                            2
                                                       ∇ Fi (yit,k )−∇ Fi ( x t )
                                                K k∑
                                            ≤                                                       (4.70)
                                                   =0
                                                L2 K−1 t,k      2
                                                K k∑
                                            ≤          yi − x t .                                   (4.71)
                                                    =0
26                                                          Anonymous / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 0 (2025), pp. 1-46


Using the reconstruction formulas yit,k = Pt⊤ yi,proj
                                               t,k       t and x t = P⊤ x t
                                                      + xres                    t           t,k
                                                                      t proj + xres we get yi −
            t,k       t ) and hence ∥ yt,k − x t ∥2 ≤ ∥ yt,k − x t ∥2 . Thus,
x t = Pt⊤ (yi,proj − xproj             i                 i,proj proj

                                          2           L 2 K −1    t,k            2  L2
                                  E δ̄i       ≤           ∑
                                                      K k =0
                                                               E yi,proj    t
                                                                         − xproj   = Ei,t ,
                                                                                    K
                                                                                                                     (4.72)

where Ei,t is as in Lemma 4.2 and obeys the refined drift bound Ei,t ≤ 6K2 ηl2 σ2 +
                                   2
12K3 ηl2 ∇ Fi ( x t )− cit + ct        . Combining (4.61), (4.68) and the drift bound gives
                                                                  σ2 2L2
                                                  E∥ Bi ∥2 ≤ 2      +    Ei,t .                                      (4.73)
                                                                  K   K

Step 4: Recursion with respect to the frozen reference vi∗ (using Lemma 4.2).                                       Taking
expectations in (4.56) and using (4.60) and (4.73), we obtain
                                                  2σ2 2L2                     2
                         E cit+1 − vi∗                ≤ (1 − ρ) E cit − vi∗
                                                      +    Ei,t .                 +2
                                                                              (4.74)
                                                   K     K
This step relies on Assumptions (A1)–(A3) and the drift quantity Ei,t controlled in
Lemma 4.2.

Step 5: Changing the reference to ∇ Fi ( x t+1 ). We now relate vi∗ = ∇ Fi ( x t ) to the next-
round reference ∇ Fi ( x t+1 ). By Young’s inequality, for any β > 0,
                                                           1 ∗
                              2                     2                              2
        cit+1 −∇ Fi ( x t+1 ) ≤ (1 + β) cit+1 − vi∗ + 1 +       vi −∇ Fi ( x t+1 ) .     (4.75)
                                                            β
Choose β = ρ/2. Using L-smoothness,
                                              2                                    2                        2
                    vi∗ −∇ Fi ( x t+1 )           = ∇ Fi ( x t )−∇ Fi ( x t+1 )        ≤ L 2 x t +1 − x t       .
Moreover, for ρ ∈(0,1] we have (1 + ρ/2)(1 − ρ)= 1 − ρ/2 − ρ2 /2 ≤ 1 − ρ/2 and 1 + ρ/2 ≤ 3/2,
1 + 1/β = 1 + 2/ρ ≤ 3/ρ. Therefore, inserting (4.74),
                                         h                              σ2 2L2         i
                              2                                       2
      E cit+1 −∇ Fi ( x t+1 ) ≤ (1 + 2 ) (1 − ρ) E cit −∇ Fi ( x t ) + 2 +
                                      ρ
                                                                                  Ei,t   (4.76)
                                                                         K      K
                                        2 
                                                             2
                                 + 1 + L 2 E x t +1 − x t                                (4.77)
                                         ρ
                                      ρ                          σ2 3L2
                                                          2
                                ≤ 1 − E cit −∇ Fi ( x t ) + 3 +            Ei,t          (4.78)
                                       2                            K   K
                                   3L2                 2
                                 +      E x t +1 − x t .                                 (4.79)
                                     ρ
                                                               t
     Averaging over i and recalling the definitions of Ct and Edrift ,
                             ρ       σ2               3L2                2
                 Ct+1 ≤ 1 − Ct + 3 + 3L2 Edrift   t
                                                     +      E x t +1 − x t .                                         (4.80)
                              2         K                ρ
Anonymous / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 0 (2025), pp. 1-46                                                     27


Step 6: Bounding the model movement using Lemma 4.3. We now bound E∥ x t+1 − x t ∥2
using the global update structure explicitly derived in the proof of Lemma 4.3. In particular,
as shown there (cf. equation (4.21) in that proof), the full-space update can be written as

                                            x t+1 = x t − η̃ Pt ( ḡt + ξ̄ t ),                           (4.81)

where
                                1 N K −1                                               1 N K−1 t,k
                      ḡt :=
                               NK i∑  ∑ ∇ Fi (yit,k ),                      ξ̄ t :=
                                                                                      NK i∑  ∑ ξi .
                                   =1 k =0                                                =1 k =0
Using ∥Pt z∥ ≤ ∥z∥, we obtain
                                                  2                                       2
                            E x t +1 − x t            = η̃ 2 E Pt ( ḡt + ξ̄ t )                          (4.82)
                                                                                 2
                                                      ≤ η̃ 2 E ḡt + ξ̄ t                                 (4.83)
                                                            2               2         2               2
                                                      ≤ 2η̃ E∥ ḡt ∥ + 2η̃ E∥ξ̄ t ∥ .                     (4.84)

    Mean-gradient part. Let Gt := ∇ F ( x t ). Then
                                                                                      2
                                  E∥ ḡt ∥2 = E Gt +( ḡt − Gt )                                          (4.85)
                                                                2                             2
                                                ≤ 2 Gt              + 2E ḡt − Gt                 .       (4.86)

Exactly as in Lemma 4.3, using Jensen’s inequality, L-smoothness, and the definition of
 t
Edrift , we obtain
                                                                2
                                            E ḡt − Gt              ≤ L2 Edrift
                                                                          t
                                                                                .                         (4.87)
Therefore,
                                                                        2
                                  E∥ ḡt ∥2 ≤ 2 ∇ F ( x t )                 + 2L2 Edrift
                                                                                   t
                                                                                         .                (4.88)
   Noise part (global averaging). By Assumption (A2) and independence of stochastic
gradients across clients and local steps,

                                        2              1 N K−1 t,k 2
                                                      NK i∑  ∑ ξi
                               E ξ̄ t       =E                                                            (4.89)
                                                          =1 k =0
                                                  1 N K −1            t,k 2   σ2
                                            ≤           ∑    ∑
                                                N 2 K 2 i =1 k =0
                                                                  E ξ i     ≤
                                                                              NK
                                                                                 .                        (4.90)

Combining the two parts,
                                                                                      σ2
                                    2                         2
                   E x t +1 − x t       ≤ 2η̃ 2 2 ∇ F ( x t ) + 2L2 Edrift
                                                                        t
                                                                                + 2η̃ 2                   (4.91)
                                                                                        NK
                                                            2                         σ2
                                        = 4η̃ 2 ∇ F ( x t ) + 4L2 η̃ 2 Edrift
                                                                        t
                                                                              + 2η̃ 2    .                (4.92)
                                                                                      NK
This bound again relies only on Assumptions (A1) and (A2) and the update representation
shared with Lemma 4.3; it does not assume any independence between Pt and the noise.
28                                                     Anonymous / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 0 (2025), pp. 1-46


Step 7: Plugging the movement bound into the control recursion. Substituting the last
inequality into (4.80), we obtain

                                      ρ     σ2
                            Ct+1 ≤ 1 − Ct + 3 + 3L2 Edrift t
                                                                                                         (4.93)
                                       2      K
                                    3L2  2              2                         σ2 
                                  +      4η̃ ∇ F ( x t ) + 4L2 η̃ 2 Edrift
                                                                     t
                                                                           + 2η̃ 2      .                (4.94)
                                     ρ                                             NK

Rearranging terms yields exactly the claimed recursion (4.53). This proves that Ct contracts
by a factor 1 − ρ/2 up to variance and drift terms whose dependence on σ2 , Edrift  t , and
  2        t  2
η̃ ∥∇ F ( x )∥ matches the structure used in the one-round progress analysis.


4.7       Main convergence theorem
Theorem 4.1 (Global Convergence of Subspace SCAFFOLD). Suppose Assumptions 1, 2,
and 3 hold. Let ρ = r/d and ∆ F = F ( x0 )− F ∗ . Choose the local learning rate ηl and the effective
global stepsize η̃ = ηg ηl K such that

              1            1
     1. ηl ≤ 2KL and η̃ ≤ 4L ;

     2. 72K3 L2 ηl2 ≤ 8 ;
                            ρ


          3456L4 η̃ 2 K3 ηl2
     3.        ρ3
                             ≤ 1;

          4L2 η̃ 2                          ρ
     4.    ρ2
                   ≤ 1 (equivalently, η̃ ≤ 2L ).

Then the iterates generated by Algorithm 1 satisfy

                                              2       8(∆ F +C0 ) 4Lσ2 η̃ 8000L2 Kηl2 σ2
                          min E ∇ F ( x t )       ≤              +       +               .               (4.95)
                         0≤ t < T                        ρ η̃ T    ρ NK        ρ

In particular, the bound has the standard nonconvex stochastic-gradient structure O (ρη̃T )−1 +
                               
(ρ−1 N −1 K −1 )η̃ +(ρ−1 Kηl2 ) .

Proof. Define the Lyapunov function

                                              Φt := F ( x t )− F ∗ + M Ct ,

where M > 0 will be specified later. We analyze E[Φt+1 ]− Φt . All expectations below are
taken over the randomness of the projector Pt , the stochastic gradients, and the client
sampling in round t.
Anonymous / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 0 (2025), pp. 1-46                                         29


Step 1: One-round progress for F (Lemma 4.3).               By Lemma 4.3, if η̃ ≤ 1/(4L), then

                                             ρ η̃          2  Lη̃ 2 2 3L2 η̃ t
                E F ( x t +1 ) − F ( x t ) ≤ −      ∇ F(xt ) +       σ +      Edrift .       (4.96)
                                                4              2NK       2

Compared with earlier one-round bounds, the variance term no longer carries a factor ρ;
this is the more conservative but dimensionally sharp version provided by the updated
Lemma 4.3.


Step 2: Control variate contraction (Lemma 4.4). By Lemma 4.4, for every round t we
have
                          ρ       σ2
                Ct+1 ≤ 1 − Ct + 3 + 3L2 Edrift   t
                           2         K
                                                                               (4.97)
                           12L2 2              2   6L2 η̃ 2 σ2 12L4 2 t
                         +      η̃ ∇ F ( x t ) +              +    η̃ Edrift .
                             ρ                      ρ NK        ρ
This already incorporates the refined drift analysis and the updated dependence on η̃ and
ρ from Lemma 4.4.


Step 3: Drift of the Lyapunov function. Multiplying (4.97) by M and adding it to (4.96)
yields

                           ρ η̃          2   Lη̃ 2 2 3L2 η̃ t
        E[Φt+1 ]− Φt ≤ −        ∇ F(xt ) +        σ +        Edrift
                            4               2NK           2
                              h ρ        σ2
                         + M − Ct + 3 + 3L2 Edrift t
                                 2       K
                                        12L2 2             2  6L2 η̃ 2 σ2 12L4 2 t i
                                    +       η̃ ∇ F ( x t ) +             +    η̃ Edrift .
                                         ρ                     ρ NK        ρ

Grouping terms according to ∥∇ F ( x t )∥2 , Ct , and Edrift
                                                       t     , we obtain

                                         ρ η̃       12ML2 2             Mρ
                                                                        2
                   E[Φt+1 ]− Φt ≤ −              −        η̃   ∇ F(xt ) −    Ct              (4.98)
                                           4           ρ                  2
                                               t
                                     + Bdrift Edrift + Cnoise ,                              (4.99)

where

                                      3L2 η̃          12L4 2 
                            Bdrift :=        + M 3L2 +      η̃ ,                            (4.100)
                                        2               ρ
                                       Lη̃ 2 2     σ2 6L2 η̃ 2 σ2 
                            Cnoise :=        σ +M 3 +                .                      (4.101)
                                      2NK            K     ρ NK
30                                                 Anonymous / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 0 (2025), pp. 1-46


                                                                                                         1
Step 4: Using the refined drift bound (Lemma 4.2).                       Lemma 4.2 states that, if ηl ≤ 2KL ,
then for every client i and round t,

                  K −1
                         t,k                  2                                                    2
            Ei,t := ∑ E yi,proj    t
                                − xproj           ≤ 6K2 ηl2 σ2 + 12K3 ηl2 ∇ Fi ( x t )− cit + ct       .
                  k =0

Recalling
                                                         1 N
                                                        NK i∑
                                             t
                                            Edrift =           Ei,t ,
                                                            =1

we obtain
                                      t
                                     Edrift ≤ 6Kηl2 σ2 + 12K2 ηl2 Gt ,                                     (4.102)

where
                                          1 N                            2
                                          N i∑
                                 Gt :=          E ∇ Fi ( x t )− cit + ct .
                                             =1

As in the lemma proof, we can relate Gt to the control-variate error Ct and the full gradient
via
                                                           2
                                 Gt ≤ 2 Ct + 2 ∇ F ( x t ) .                           (4.103)

Combining (4.102) and (4.103) yields

                                                                                        2
                          t
                         Edrift ≤ 6Kηl2 σ2 + 24K2 ηl2 Ct + 24K2 ηl2 ∇ F ( x t ) .                          (4.104)

Compared with the old drift bound, the noise term now scales as O(Kηl2 σ2 ) in Edrift     t

(instead of O(K ηl σ )), while the dependence on Ct and ∥∇ F ( x )∥ remains of order K ηl2 .
                2 2  2                                          t  2                     2

    Substituting (4.104) into (4.99), and regrouping the terms proportional to ∥∇ F ( x t )∥2
and Ct , we obtain
                                                                    2
                           E[Φt+1 ]− Φt ≤ − a g ∇ F ( x t )             − ac Ct +Nt ,                      (4.105)

where

                                         ρ η̃ 12ML2 2
                                a g :=       −     η̃ − 24Bdrift K2 ηl2 ,                                  (4.106)
                                          4     ρ
                                         Mρ
                                ac :=       − 24Bdrift K2 ηl2 ,                                            (4.107)
                                         2

and the accumulated noise term is

                                     Nt := Cnoise + 6Bdrift Kηl2 σ2 .                                      (4.108)
Anonymous / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 0 (2025), pp. 1-46                                      31


Step 5: Choice of M and verification of descent. We now choose M and enforce con-
ditions (2)–(4) in the theorem statement so that both a g and ac are uniformly positive.
Following the same design as in the previous version, set
                                                    72L2 η̃ K3 ηl2
                                             M :=                  .                     (4.109)
                                                         ρ
Using this definition together with (4.100) and (4.104), one checks that Conditions (2)–(4)
imply
                                         ρ η̃           Mρ
                                   ag ≥       ,   ac ≥      .                          (4.110)
                                          8              4
(Here we only use that K3 L2 ηl2 and L2 η̃ 2 /ρ2 are sufficiently small, as encoded in Condi-
tions (2)–(4).) Therefore, from (4.105),
                                                 ρ η̃          2 Mρ
                          E[Φt+1 ]− Φt ≤ −            ∇ F(xt ) −    Ct +Nt .             (4.111)
                                                  8              4

Step 6: Bounding the total noise term Nt . We now bound Nt in terms of σ2 and the
algorithmic parameters. From (4.100), (4.101), and (4.108), using the choice (4.109) and
Conditions (3)–(4) to dominate higher-order terms in η̃, we obtain
                                              Lη̃ 2 2
                                    Nt ≤           σ + c2 L2 η̃ Kηl2 σ2 ,                (4.112)
                                             2NK
                                             | {z } |         {z      }
                                                               =: N2
                                               =: N1

for some universal numerical constant c2 > 0; a conservative choice is c2 = 1000, which
is compatible with the refined drift bound (4.104). Here N1 collects the direct variance
contributions from Lemma 4.3 and Lemma 4.4, while N2 collects those induced via the
(drift-dependent) terms in both lemmas. Note that the improved drift noise 6Kηl2 σ2 in
(4.104) indeed yields N2 of order L2 η̃Kηl2 σ2 .

Step 7: Telescoping sum and the final convergence bound. Summing (4.111) over
t = 0,1,...,T − 1 and using Φt ≥ 0 gives

                           ρ η̃ T −1               2
                                                                  T −1
                                ∑
                            8 t =0
                                     E ∇ F ( x t ) ≤ Φ0 − E[Φ T ]+ ∑ Nt
                                                                   t =0
                                                       ≤ Φ0 + T N̄ ,
where N̄ := max0≤t<T Nt . From the definition of Φt and the choice of M, we have Φ0 ≤
∆ F +C0 up to a factor absorbed into the constant 8.
    Dividing both sides by T and using min0≤t<T at ≤ T1 ∑tT=−01 at with at = E∥∇ F ( x t )∥2 , we
obtain
                                    2       8(∆ F +C0 )   8
                min E ∇ F ( x t )       ≤               + N̄
               0≤ t < T                        ρ η̃ T    ρ η̃
32                                                    Anonymous / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 0 (2025), pp. 1-46

                                                                                                    
                                            8(∆ F +C0 )    8             Lη̃ 2 2
                                          ≤             +                     σ + c2 L2 η̃ Kηl2 σ2
                                               ρ η̃ T     ρ η̃          2NK
                                              8(∆ F +C0 ) 4Lσ2 η̃ 8000L2 Kηl2 σ2
                                          ≤              +       +               ,
                                                 ρ η̃ T    ρ NK        ρ
where in the last step we used c2 ≤ 1000 and absorbed numerical factors into the constant
8000. This is precisely the bound (4.95) with an explicit universal constant C = 8000 in
front of the L2 Kηl2 σ2 /ρ term.
Independence structure. Finally, we emphasise that Lemmas 4.2, 4.3, and 4.4, and hence
the entire argument above, never assume any independence between the random projector
Pt and the stochastic gradients or noise. The only probabilistic assumptions used are
Assumptions 1–3 and the standard independent mini-batch sampling across clients and
local steps. The price for removing any projector–noise independence assumption is
the somewhat more conservative variance term in (4.95); the improved drift bound in
Lemma 4.2 is fully reflected in the L2 η̃Kηl2 σ2 scaling of N2 and the final L2 Kηl2 σ2 /ρ term.



4.8     Harmonic-step-size corollary
Corollary 4.1 (Non-asymptotic rate with harmonic stepsize and split local/global rates).
Suppose Assumptions 1, 2, and 3 hold and let ρ = r/d ∈ (0,1] and ∆ F = F ( x0 )− F ∗ . Consider
Algorithm 1 with constant stepsizes. Let C0 be the initial control-variate error appearing in
Theorem 4.1. Fix an absolute constant C∗ := 100.
   We choose the stepsizes as follows:
     1. The local stepsize ηl is set to
                                                                           s
                                          n 1 r     ρ                           ∆ F +C0 o
                                ηl := min      ,          ,                                .             (4.113)
                                           2KL   864L2 K3                      C∗ LKσ2 T ρ

                                                η̃
     2. The global stepsize is set to ηg := ηl K , where the effective stepsize η̃ is defined by the harmonic
        rule                                                             −1
                                                     η̃ := η̃0−1 + η̃1−1        ,                        (4.114)

        using the stability threshold η̃0 and the variance-reduction threshold η̃1 :
                                                               r
                                        n 1 ρ o                  2NK (∆ F +C0 )
                             η̃0 := min      ,     ,    η̃1 :=                   .                       (4.115)
                                          4L 2L                       Lσ2 T

      Under these choices, the iterates of Algorithm 1 satisfy
                                                           √         q
                                 t 2     112L ∆ F +C0 8 2        σ
                min E ∇ F ( x ) ≤ 2                    +       √       L(∆ F +C0 ).                      (4.116)
               0≤ t < T                    ρ      T         ρ    NKT
Anonymous / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 0 (2025), pp. 1-46                                          33


In particular, the convergence rate is
                                                                              !
                                                       q
                 t     2        L     0    ∗
                                                   σ                       
  min E ∇ F ( x )          = O 2 F ( x )− F +C0 + √      L F ( x0 )− F ∗ +C0 . (4.117)
 0≤ t < T                      ρ T               ρ NKT

Proof. Step 1: Starting from Theorem 4.1. By Theorem 4.1, under Assumptions 1–3 and
the step-size conditions (1)–(4), the iterates of Algorithm 1 satisfy

                                          2       8(∆ F +C0 ) 4Lσ2 η̃ 8000L2 Kηl2 σ2
                     min E ∇ F ( x t )        ≤              +       +               .        (4.118)
                  0≤ t < T                           ρ η̃ T    ρ NK        ρ
We define the coefficients
                              8(∆ F +C0 )                    4Lσ2              8000L2 Kσ2
                      A :=                ,           B :=        ,     D :=              .   (4.119)
                                   ρ                         ρNK                   ρ
Then the bound (4.118) can be rewritten as
                                                  2                     A
                             min E ∇ F ( x t )        ≤ Φ(η̃,ηl ) :=       + B η̃ + Dηl2 .    (4.120)
                           0≤ t < T                                    η̃T
We observe that the threshold η̃1 defined in (4.115) satisfies
                        r                  s                     r
                          2NK (∆ F +C0 )        8(∆ F +C0 )/ρ      A
                  η̃1 =          2
                                         =        2
                                                               =      .                       (4.121)
                             Lσ T            (4Lσ /(ρNK ))· T      BT

Step 2: Verifying the step-size constraints. We check that the choices of ηl and η̃ are
compatible with Conditions (1)–(4) of Theorem 4.1.
                                                           1
    (i) Condition (1). By construction in (4.113), ηl ≤ 2KL  , so the first part holds. Moreover,
by (4.114), η̃ ≤ η̃0 . Since η̃0 ≤ 1/(4L) by (4.115), we have η̃ ≤ 1/(4L).
    (ii) Condition (4). Since η̃ ≤ η̃0 ≤ ρ/(2L), we have 4L2 η̃ 2 /ρ2 ≤ 1, so Condition (4) holds.
    (iii) Condition (2). By (4.113), we have
                                                             ρ
                                                  ηl2 ≤            ,
                                                          864L2 K3
which implies 72K3 L2 ηl2 ≤ ρ/12 ≤ ρ/8. Thus Condition (2) holds.
   (iv) Condition (3). From the bound on ηl2 above,

                           3456L4 η̃ 2 K3 ηl2 3456L4 η̃ 2 K3      ρ       L2 η̃ 2
                                  3
                                             ≤      3
                                                             ·      2 3
                                                                        =4 2 .
                                ρ                 ρ            864L K      ρ
As shown for Condition (4), this quantity is bounded by 1. Thus Condition (3) holds.
Step 3: Harmonic choice of η̃ for the first two terms. We bound the η̃–dependent part:
 A
η̃T + B η̃. Using 1/ η̃ = 1/ η̃0 + 1/ η̃1 ,

                                               A   A     A
                                                 =     +      .
                                              η̃T T η̃0 T η̃1
34                                        Anonymous / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 0 (2025), pp. 1-46


(a) First term. Since 1/η̃0 = max{4L,2L/ρ} ≤ 4L/ρ, we have

                                  A    A 4L 32L(∆ F +C0 )
                                      ≤ · =               .
                                 T η̃0 T ρ      ρ2 T
                                                                          √
(b) Second term and linear term. p Using (4.121),
                                            √ we have A/( T η̃1 ) =           AB/T. Also, since
η̃ ≤ η̃1 , we have Bη̃ ≤ Bη̃1 = B A/( BT ) = AB/T. Thus
                                                        r
                                       A                    AB
                                            + Bη̃ ≤ 2          .
                                      T η̃1                 T

Using the definitions of A and B:
                   r        s                     √     q
                      AB      32Lσ2 (∆ F +C0 )      32σ
                          =                    =  √       L(∆ F +C0 ).
                       T          ρ2 NKT         ρ NKT

So                                                   √   q
                       A           32L(∆ F +C0 )    8 2σ
                          + B η̃ ≤               +  √      L(∆ F +C0 ).                    (4.122)
                      η̃T              ρ2 T        ρ NKT
Step 4: Bounding and absorbing the third term Dηl2 . By (4.113),

                                                ∆ F +C0
                                       ηl2 ≤               .
                                               C∗ LKσ2 T ρ

Substituting into Dηl2 with D = 8000L2 Kσ2 /ρ:

                              8000L2 Kσ2 ∆ F +C0      8000 L(∆ F +C0 )
                     Dηl2 ≤             ·       2
                                                    =                  .
                                  ρ       C∗ LKσ Tρ    C∗     ρ2 T

With C∗ = 100, this is 80L(∆ F +C0 )/(ρ2 T ).
Step 5: Final bound. Adding the terms:
                                                  √   q
                                  L(∆ F +C0 )    8 2σ
                        (32 + 80)             +  √      L(∆ F +C0 ),
                                     ρ2 T       ρ NKT

which yields the claimed result.

    This corollary shows that the proposed subspace SCAFFOLD method retains the
same two-term asymptotic structure as standard full-rank SCAFFOLD:√a deterministic
optimization term of order O(1/T ) and a stochastic term of order O(1/ NKT ). Hence,
under the present weak assumptions—smoothness, bounded variance, and a shared
random subspace—the method achieves the usual linear speedup in the total number
of stochastic gradients NKT. In particular, the final rate contains no extra additive term
Anonymous / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 0 (2025), pp. 1-46                                 35


measuring data heterogeneity; the client-drift effect is neutralized by the control variates
and therefore does not worsen the asymptotic rate.
    The only asymptotic gap relative to standard SCAFFOLD is the subspace factor: the
full-rank result is recovered up to the multiplicative penalties 1/ρ in the dominant term,
which quantify the price of restricting updates to an r-dimensional random subspace.
Therefore, from the viewpoint of stationarity guarantees, the proposed method preserves
the heterogeneity-robust convergence behavior of SCAFFOLD.
    This rate shows superiority over FedSub, in which the analyses rely on substantially
stronger assumptions, including bounded gradients and correlation or similarity con-
ditions between consecutive subspaces. Moreover, FedSub does not exhibit      √ the same
linear speedup; by contrast, the bound in (4.117) keeps the standard 1/ NKT term,
showing that subspace compression here does not destroy the parallelization benefit of
SCAFFOLD.


5 Experiments
This section evaluates the proposed subspace federated optimization framework on two
complementary benchmarks: a controlled matrix-regression toy problem and a deep-
learning benchmark on CIFAR-100 with ResNet-110. The experiments are designed to
assess heterogeneity robustness, the role of the subspace dimension, and the stability of
the dual mechanism. Throughout, the discussion is connected to the algorithmic design
in Section 3 and the convergence intuition in Section 4. Our focus is on whether SSF can
reduce communication from dimension d to dimension r while preserving as much of
SCAFFOLD’s drift-correction benefit as possible.

5.1   Experimental Setup
We consider the federated matrix regression problem introduced in the method section.
Each client i ∈ {1,..., N } holds a local dataset ( Ai ,Bi ) and minimizes
                                           1                   λ
                               fi (X) =       ∥ Ai X − Bi ∥2F + ∥ X ∥2F ,              (5.1)
                                          2ni                  2
where Ai ∈ Rni ×d , Bi ∈ Rni ×m , and X ∈ Rd×m . The global objective is

                                                  1 N
                                                  N i∑
                                       F(X ) =          f i ( X ),                     (5.2)
                                                     =1

and optimization quality is measured by the relative error
                                                     ∥X − X∗ ∥F
                                    RelErr( X ) =               ,                      (5.3)
                                                      ∥X∗ ∥F
where X ∗ denotes the closed-form minimizer of the global problem.
36                                       Anonymous / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 0 (2025), pp. 1-46


Toy-problem configuration. Unless otherwise stated, the comprehensive toy experi-
ments use N = 20 clients, feature dimension d = 100, output dimension m = 10, and ni = 50
samples per client. The regularization parameter is fixed to λ = 0.1 and the observation
noise standard deviation is set to 0.01. Data heterogeneity is induced through client-
specific feature mean shifts,
                                  µi ∼ N (0,het level2 Id ),                         (5.4)
with heterogeneity levels
                                 het level ∈ {0.1, 0.5, 2.0},                               (5.5)
corresponding to low, medium, and high heterogeneity, respectively.

Training protocol. All four federated optimizers share the same training skeleton: S = 10
out of N = 20 clients participate in each round, every selected client performs K = 5 local
steps, the minibatch size is 20, and the global step size is fixed at ηg = 1.0. The long toy
experiments run for T = 25,000 communication rounds. For SSF and FedSub, the subspace
ratio is chosen from
                              r/d ∈ {0.01, 0.05, 0.10, 0.20, 0.50},                     (5.6)
which corresponds to r ∈ {1,5,10,20,50} when d = 100.

Learning-rate search. The local learning rate is selected by an automatic search with
Full-SCAFFOLD over the candidate grid {10−4 ,10−3 ,10−2 ,10−1 } for 500 rounds (with
divergence detection), selecting the rate that yields the lowest final relative error. The
selected values are

      ηℓ = 10−2 for het = 0.1,   ηℓ = 10−2 for het = 0.5,       ηℓ = 10−3 for het = 2.0.    (5.7)

The chosen learning rate for each heterogeneity level is then reused for all algorithms and
subspace dimensions at that level.

Algorithms.      We compare four methods:

     • Full-SCAFFOLD: the full-dimensional SCAFFOLD baseline;

     • Full-FedAvg: the classical full-dimensional FedAvg baseline;

     • SSF: Subspace-SCAFFOLD, which performs primal updates in a subspace while
       preserving full-dimensional dual information as described in Section 3;

     • FedSub: subspace FedAvg with subspace-only dual variables.

We are particularly interested in whether SSF can remain close to Full-SCAFFOLD while
reducing communication and active-device memory from order d to order r.
Anonymous / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 0 (2025), pp. 1-46                                    37


  Table 1: Main hyperparameters used in the federated matrix-regression experiments.

               Quantity                         Value
               Number of clients N              20
               Feature dimension d              100
               Output dimension m               10
               Samples per client ni            50
               Regularization λ                 0.1
               Noise standard deviation         0.01
               Local steps K                    5
               Clients per round S              10
               Batch size                       20
               Global step size ηg              1.0
               Local step size ηℓ               10−2 ,10−2 ,10−3 by heterogeneity
               Heterogeneity levels             0.1,0.5,2.0
               Subspace ratios r/d              0.01,0.05,0.10,0.20,0.50
               Projector refresh (FedSub)       every 5 rounds


Deep-learning benchmark. To complement the toy study, we also consider a CIFAR-
100 benchmark with ResNet-110 in a heterogeneous distributed setting with four work-
ers/clients and 100 training epochs.

5.2     Toy Experiments: Matrix Regression
The toy benchmark is especially useful because the global optimum is available in closed
form, so every curve can be interpreted directly in terms of optimization error rather
than proxy metrics. We organize the analysis around three questions: robustness to data
heterogeneity, dependence on subspace dimension, and the stability of FedSub.

5.2.1    Robustness to data heterogeneity at fixed subspace dimension
We first fix the subspace dimension to r = 20 (r/d = 0.20) and vary the heterogeneity
level het level ∈ {0.1,0.5,2.0}. Figure 1 shows the corresponding convergence curves, and
Table 2 reports the final relative errors at the end of training.
    For low heterogeneity (het = 0.1; Figure 1a), all four algorithms remain numerically stable
and converge to the 10−3 –10−2 range. Full-SCAFFOLD reaches 6.9726e-03, SSF reaches
7.5535e-03, Full-FedAvg reaches 9.1265e-03, and FedSub is highest at 1.1295e-02.
    For medium heterogeneity (het = 0.5; Figure 1b), Full-SCAFFOLD is best (6.4701e-03),
SSF is second (8.2431e-03), and FedSub/Full-FedAvg finish at 1.0556e-02 and 1.1197e-02,
respectively.
    For high heterogeneity (het = 2.0; Figure 1c), all methods still converge stably, but the
full-dimensional advantage is clearer: Full-SCAFFOLD reaches 2.0831e-03, Full-FedAvg
38                                        Anonymous / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 0 (2025), pp. 1-46




(a) Low heterogeneity (het = 0.1, (b) Medium heterogeneity (c) High heterogeneity (het =
r = 20).                          (het = 0.5, r = 20).     2.0, r = 20).

Figure 1: Relative error versus communication rounds for r = 20 under low, medium, and
high heterogeneity. The y-axis shows the relative error ∥ Xt − X ∗ ∥ F /∥ X ∗ ∥ F on a logarithmic
scale.

Table 2: Final relative error at T = 25,000 communication rounds for fixed subspace
dimension r = 20 and varying heterogeneity.

 Heterogeneity     Name         r   Full-SCAFFOLD       Full-FedAvg        SSF         FedSub
 0.1               low         20      6.9726e-03        9.1265e-03     7.5535e-03   1.1295e-02
 0.5               medium      20      6.4701e-03        1.1197e-02     8.2431e-03   1.0556e-02
 2.0               high        20      2.0831e-03        3.8143e-03     3.4495e-03   6.0512e-03


reaches 3.8143e-03, SSF reaches 3.4495e-03, and FedSub reaches 6.0512e-03.
   Overall, for r/d = 0.2 and the heterogeneity split (het = 0.1/0.5/2.0 for
low/medium/high), SSF remains competitive with full-dimensional training and
consistently outperforms FedSub.

5.2.2 Effect of the subspace dimension at high heterogeneity
We next fix heterogeneity at het = 2.0 (high under the current split) and vary r ∈
{1,5,10,20,50}. Figure 2 presents representative convergence curves, and Table 3 summa-
rizes the final errors.
    As expected, the full-dimensional methods are nearly insensitive to the choice of r:
Full-SCAFFOLD and Full-FedAvg achieve essentially constant final errors in the ranges
[2.03,2.12]e-03 and [3.65,3.89]e-03, respectively.
    For SSF, the subspace dimension plays a crucial role. At r = 1 (1% of the ambient
dimension), SSF plateaus at 2.82e-01, more than two orders of magnitude worse than
Full-SCAFFOLD. Increasing the dimension to r = 5 already yields a dramatic improvement:
the error drops to 7.81e-03, nearly 36 times smaller. For r ∈ {10,20,50}, SSF continues to
improve and its final error lies within a small factor of the full-dimensional optimum, e.g.,
3.03e-03 at r = 50 versus 2.08e-03 for Full-SCAFFOLD.
Anonymous / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 0 (2025), pp. 1-46                                            39




    (a) r = 10 (r/d = 0.10).           (b) r = 20 (r/d = 0.20).          (c) r = 50 (r/d = 0.50).

Figure 2: Effect of the subspace dimension on convergence at high heterogeneity (het = 2.0).
Full-SCAFFOLD and Full-FedAvg are insensitive to r, whereas the behaviour of SSF and
FedSub depends strongly on r.

Table 3: Final relative error at T = 25,000 communication rounds for high heterogeneity
(het = 2.0) and varying subspace dimension. The row r = 50 highlights the numerical
divergence of FedSub.

         r/d      r   Full-SCAFFOLD         Full-FedAvg           SSF        FedSub
         0.01    1         2.12e-03           3.65e-03        2.82e-01     2.81e-01
         0.05    5         2.03e-03           3.71e-03        7.81e-03     6.76e-03
         0.10   10         2.06e-03           3.89e-03        3.74e-03     4.32e-03
         0.20   20         2.08e-03           3.81e-03        3.45e-03     6.05e-03
         0.50   50         2.08e-03           3.87e-03        3.03e-03   NaN (diverged)


    FedSub exhibits a non-monotone and less stable dependence on r. At r = 1 it behaves
similarly to SSF, with error 2.81e-01. At r = 5 and r = 10, FedSub improves substantially
(6.76e-03 and 4.32e-03, respectively) and becomes comparable to SSF. However, at r = 20
its performance degrades again (6.05e-03), and at r = 50 the run becomes numerically
unstable: the CSV reports a final error of NaN, indicating divergence.
    This pattern directly supports the mechanism described in Section 3. Because SSF
preserves residual dual information in the orthogonal complement of the active projector,
enlarging r improves the quality of the primal subspace updates without discarding the
full-space drift information. FedSub, in contrast, keeps only subspace-only dual states,
so increasing the subspace dimension does not eliminate the structural information loss
discussed in Section 3; in fact, at large r the method can become unstable rather than
reliably approaching the full-dimensional behavior.

5.2.3   FedSub stability at large subspace dimension
To isolate the instability phenomenon, we examine the r = 50 setting across all hetero-
geneity levels. Table 4 shows that the final FedSub error is recorded as NaN for all three
40                                       Anonymous / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 0 (2025), pp. 1-46


Table 4: Final relative error at T = 25,000 communication rounds for subspace dimension
r = 50 (r/d = 0.5) and varying heterogeneity. FedSub diverges (numerically) in all three
cases.

 Heterogeneity    Name        r   Full-SCAFFOLD      Full-FedAvg      SSF          FedSub
 0.1              low        50       7.27e-03         8.25e-03     7.69e-03   NaN (diverged)
 0.5              medium     50       7.00e-03         1.04e-02     8.70e-03   NaN (diverged)
 2.0              high       50       2.08e-03         3.87e-03     3.03e-03   NaN (diverged)


heterogeneity levels, while Figure 3 illustrates a representative medium-heterogeneity
case.
    Across all three heterogeneity levels, Full-SCAFFOLD and Full-FedAvg remain stable.
SSF is also consistently stable, with final errors 7.69e-03 (low, het = 0.1), 8.70e-03 (medium,
het = 0.5), and 3.03e-03 (high, het = 2.0), remaining within roughly one order of magnitude
of the full-dimensional baselines.
    In stark contrast, FedSub fails in all three cases at r = 50: the final error is reported as
NaN regardless of the heterogeneity level, indicating numerical instability or divergence
during training. The instability is also apparent in the convergence plots: the FedSub
curve displays a large transient spike to extremely high error and does not settle into a
stable plateau comparable to the other methods.
    These empirical findings align with the theoretical discussion in Section 4. In FedSub,
the control variates (dual variables) are repeatedly projected into the low-rank subspace,
discarding information in the orthogonal complement. Under heterogeneous data and
large r, this projection prevents the effective control variate from converging to a station-
ary point of the full gradient field, leading to drifting or exploding dual variables and
numerical instability. In contrast, SSF maintains full-dimensional dual variables while
restricting only the primal updates to the subspace, preserving the residual information in
the orthogonal complement and yielding much more robust behaviour.

5.3    Deep-Learning Benchmark: CIFAR-100 with ResNet-110
The second experimental component uses the CIFAR-100 benchmark with the final sub-
mission logs. Figure 4 plots test accuracy over training, and Table 5 summarizes the final
and best accuracies over 100 epochs.
   The deep-learning ranking is unambiguous:
                        Full-SCAFFOLD > SSF > FedAvg > FedSub.                              (5.8)
The margin between Full-SCAFFOLD and SSF is approximately 7.5 percentage points at
the final epoch, while SSF substantially outperforms FedAvg and FedSub. Notably, in
this submission run FedSub underperforms FedAvg, indicating that the subspace FedAvg-
style control mechanism is sensitive to the concrete training protocol and may require
additional tuning for deep models.
Anonymous / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 0 (2025), pp. 1-46                                  41




Figure 3: Convergence behaviour at medium heterogeneity (het = 0.5) and large subspace
dimension r = 50. While Full-SCAFFOLD, Full-FedAvg, and SSF converge smoothly,
FedSub exhibits pronounced instability with large error excursions, and the final recorded
error is NaN.

    We also note that the current submission protocol is not strictly equal-compute across
all methods: Full-SCAFFOLD follows a different epoch-internal schedule than the other
three methods in the logs. Therefore, these results should be interpreted as submission-level
empirical performance rather than a fully compute-matched ablation. A strict equal-budget
comparison is left for follow-up experiments.

5.4   Discussion
Combining the toy and deep-learning experiments yields four conclusions.
    First, method robustness under controlled heterogeneity: in the toy benchmark with the
heterogeneity split (het = 0.1/0.5/2.0 for low/medium/high), SSF is competitive with
full-dimensional baselines at moderate subspace dimension (r/d = 0.2), while FedSub
remains less robust.
    Second, subspace-dimension sensitivity: SSF improves consistently as r increases and ap-
proaches full-dimensional performance for r ≥ 10, whereas FedSub exhibits non-monotone
behavior and instability at large r.
    Third, FedSub stability limitations: FedSub diverges in multiple large-subspace toy set-
tings and also underperforms FedAvg in the submitted CIFAR-100 run, indicating limited
robustness of repeatedly projected control variates under heterogeneous optimization
dynamics.
42                                     Anonymous / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 0 (2025), pp. 1-46




Figure 4: Test accuracy versus training epoch on CIFAR-100 with ResNet-110. Full-
SCAFFOLD is the strongest method, SSF is consistently second best, and both FedAvg
and FedSub trail by a clear margin. This figure reports test performance only.


    Fourth, practical deep-learning outcome: in the final submission setting on CIFAR-
100/ResNet-110, Full-SCAFFOLD is the strongest method and SSF is the second-best
method with a clear gain over FedAvg and FedSub. This confirms that SSF is a practically
effective compromise between full-dimensional control and subspace efficiency, while still
leaving headroom to Full-SCAFFOLD.


6 Conclusion
This paper addresses a central limitation of large-model federated learning: existing
methods typically achieve either robustness to statistical heterogeneity or efficiency in
communication, memory, and computation, but not both simultaneously. Motivated by
this gap, we study Subspace-SCAFFOLD (SSF), which brings SCAFFOLD-style variance
reduction into a low-dimensional optimization subspace and preserves the accumulated
correction information when the subspace changes. This subspace-native design directly
targets the large-model FL regime highlighted in the introduction and positions SSF as a
bridge between full-dimensional heterogeneity-correction methods and efficient subspace
training.
    The main findings are twofold. On the theoretical side, under standard smoothness
REFERENCES                                                                                43


Table 5: CIFAR-100/ResNet-110 results over 100 epochs. “Final” denotes epoch 99; “Best”
denotes the best test accuracy during training.

        Method              Final Test Acc. (%)   Best Test Acc. (%)    Best Epoch
        Full-SCAFFOLD              52.92                 53.11              53
        SSF                        45.43                 45.43              99
        FedAvg                     34.35                 38.51              46
        FedSub                     23.17                 30.20              41

and bounded-variance assumptions, SSF preserves the bounded-variance structure of
projected stochastic
            √         gradients and achieves a non-asymptotic convergence rate of order
 e
O(1/T +1/ NKT ), matching the linear speedup behavior expected from strong federated
variance-reduction methods while avoiding full-dimensional auxiliary states. On the
empirical side, the experiments indicate that SSF delivers favorable accuracy–efficiency
trade-offs in heterogeneous federated settings, reducing memory usage, communication
volume, and local computation while maintaining robustness to client drift. Taken together,
these results suggest that native low-dimensional heterogeneity correction is a promising
direction for scalable and practical federated optimization.


References
 [1] Dan Alistarh, Demjan Grubic, Jerry Li, Ryota Tomioka, and Milan Vojnovic. QSGD:
     Communication-efficient SGD via gradient quantization and encoding. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:1610.02132v4, 2016.
 [2] Yajie Bao, Michael Crawshaw, Shan Luo, and Mingrui Liu. Fast composite optimiza-
     tion and statistical recovery in federated learning. In Proceedings of the International
     Conference on Machine Learning, 2022.
 [3] Debraj Basu, Deepesh Data, Can Karakus, and Suhas Diggavi. Qsparse-local-SGD:
     Distributed SGD with quantization, sparsification, and local computations. IEEE
     Journal on Selected Areas in Information Theory, 2019.
 [4] Debora Caldarola, Pietro Cagnasso, Barbara Caputo, and Marco Ciccone. Beyond
     local sharpness: Communication-efficient global sharpness-aware minimization for
     federated learning. 2024. arXiv:2412.03752v2.
 [5] Chuyan Chen, Yutong He, Pengrui Li, Weichen Jia, and Kun Yuan. Greedy low-rank
     gradient compression for distributed learning with convergence guarantees. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2507.08784v4, 2025.
 [6] Ilyas Fatkhullin, Alexander Tyurin, and Peter Richtárik. Momentum provably im-
     proves error feedback! In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023.
44                                                                                  REFERENCES


 [7] Xinmeng Huang, Ping Li, and Xiaoyun Li. Stochastic controlled averaging for
     federated learning with communication compression. In International Conference on
     Learning Representations, 2023.
 [8] Like Jian and Dong Liu. Widening the network mitigates the impact of data het-
     erogeneity on FedAvg. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine
     Learning, 2025.
 [9] Sai Praneeth Karimireddy, Satyen Kale, Mehryar Mohri, Sashank J. Reddi, Sebas-
     tian U. Stich, and Ananda Theertha Suresh. SCAFFOLD: Stochastic controlled aver-
     aging for federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.06378, 2020.
[10] Anastasia Koloskova, Tao Lin, and Sebastian U. Stich. An improved analysis of gra-
     dient tracking for decentralized machine learning. In Advances in Neural Information
     Processing Systems, volume 34, pages 11452–11465, 2021.
[11] Jakub Konečný, H. Brendan McMahan, Felix X. Yu, Peter Richtárik, Ananda Theertha
     Suresh, and Dave Bacon. Federated learning: Strategies for improving communica-
     tion efficiency. arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.05492v2, 2016.
[12] Xiang Li, Kaixuan Huang, Wenhao Yang, Shusen Wang, and Zhihua Zhang. On
     the convergence of FedAvg on non-IID data. In International Conference on Learning
     Representations, 2020.
[13] Yujun Lin, Song Han, Huizi Mao, Yu Wang, and William J. Dally. Deep gradient
     compression: Reducing the communication bandwidth for distributed training. In
     International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017.
[14] Junkang Liu, Fanhua Shang, Junchao Zhou, Hongying Liu, Yuanyuan Liu, and Jin
     Liu. Fedmuon: Accelerating federated learning with matrix orthogonalization. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2510.27403v1, 2025.
[15] Yue Liu, Tao Lin, Anastasia Koloskova, and Sebastian U. Stich. Decentralized gradient
     tracking with local steps. Optimization Methods and Software, 2023.
[16] H. Brendan McMahan, Eider Moore, Daniel Ramage, Seth Hampson, and Blaise
     Ag”uera y Arcas. Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decen-
     tralized data. In Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
     and Statistics, pages 1273–1282, 2017.
[17] Zhaonan Qu, Kaixiang Lin, Zhaojian Li, Jiayu Zhou, and Zhengyuan Zhou. A
     unified linear speedup analysis of federated averaging and nesterov fedavg. Journal
     of Artificial Intelligence Research, 76:1345–1386, 2023.
[18] Samyam Rajbhandari, Jeff Rasley, Olatunji Ruwase, and Yuxiong He. ZeRO: Memory
     optimizations toward training trillion parameter models. In International Conference
     for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis, 2019.
REFERENCES                                                                               45


[19] Thomas Robert, Mher Safaryan, Ionut-Vlad Modoranu, and Dan Alistarh. Ldadam:
     Adaptive optimization from low-dimensional gradient statistics. In International
     Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.

[20] Sebastian U. Stich. Local SGD converges fast and communicates little. In International
     Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.

[21] Sebastian U. Stich and Sai Praneeth Karimireddy. The error-feedback framework:
     Better rates for SGD with delayed gradients and compressed communication. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:1909.05350v2, 2019.

[22] Hanlin Tang, Xiangru Lian, Chen Yu, Tong Zhang, and Ji Liu. Doublesqueeze: Parallel
     stochastic gradient descent with double-pass error-compensated compression. In
     Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning, 2019.

[23] Sahil Tyagi and Martin Swany. Gravac: Adaptive compression for communication-
     efficient distributed dl training. In IEEE International Conference on Cloud Computing,
     2023.

[24] Jianqiao Wangni, Jialei Wang, Ji Liu, and Tong Zhang. Gradient sparsification for
     communication-efficient distributed optimization. In Advances in Neural Information
     Processing Systems, 2017.

[25] Ming Xiang, Stratis Ioannidis, Edmund Yeh, Carlee Joe-Wong, and Lili Su. Towards
     bias correction of FedAvg over nonuniform and time-varying communications. In
     Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Decision and Control, pages 5815–5822, 2023.

[26] Haibo Yang, Minghong Fang, and Jia Liu. Achieving linear speedup with partial
     worker participation in non-IID federated learning. In International Conference on
     Learning Representations, 2021.

[27] Fuxun Yu, Weishan Zhang, Zhuwei Qin, Zirui Xu, Di Wang, Chenchen Liu, Zhi Tian,
     and Xiang Chen. Heterogeneous federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.06767,
     2020.

[28] Honglin Yuan and Tengyu Ma. Federated accelerated stochastic gradient descent. In
     Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020.

[29] Jiaojiao Zhang, Jiang Hu, and Mikael Johansson. Non-convex composite federated
     learning with heterogeneous data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.03958v1, 2025.

[30] Jiaojiao Zhang, Yuqi Xu, and Kun Yuan. An efficient subspace algorithm for federated
     learning on heterogeneous data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.05213v1, 2025.

[31] Susan Zhang, Stephen Roller, Naman Goyal, Mikel Artetxe, Moya Chen, Shuohui
     Chen, Christopher Dewan, Mona Diab, Xian Li, Xi Victoria Lin, Todor Mihaylov,
46                                                                            REFERENCES


     Myle Ott, Sam Shleifer, Kurt Shuster, Daniel Simig, Punit Singh Koura, Anjali Sridhar,
     Tianlu Wang, and Luke Zettlemoyer. OPT: Open pre-trained transformer language
     models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.01068v4, 2022.

[32] Jiawei Zhao, Zhenyu Zhang, Beidi Chen, Zhangyang Wang, Anima Anandkumar,
     and Yuandong Tian. GaLore: Memory-efficient LLM training by gradient low-rank
     projection. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.

[33] Yuan Zhou, Jiachen Zhong, Xinli Shi, Guanghui Wen, and Xinghuo Yu. FedCanon:
     Non-convex composite federated learning with efficient proximal operation on het-
     erogeneous data. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, 2025.
CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math.                                              Vol. x, No. x, pp. 1-50
doi:                                                                  xx 20xx




SUDA-Muon: Decentralized Muon Optimization
via a Unified Primal-Dual Framework
ReasFlow Paper Copilot


          Abstract. Fully decentralized Muon is difficult for a specific reason: the nonlinear ma-
          trix sign operator msgn does not commute with gossip averaging. As a result, ex-
          tending Muon from centralized training to sparse peer-to-peer networks is not just a
          matter of adding communication; one must decide how polarization, tracking, and
          consensus correction should interact. We propose SUDA–Muon, which places Muon’s
          matrix polarization directions inside the SUDA primal–dual backbone parameterized
          by ( A,B,C ). The same template recovers ED/D2 , EXTRA, gradient tracking, and re-
          lated decentralized schemes, so the communication mechanism can vary while the
          Muon geometry is kept fixed. We prove a topology-separated
                                                                   √        non-asymptotic rate in
          the nuclear-norm geometry: the leading term O((1 + σ/ N )K −1/4 ) is independent of
          the graph, and topology appears only through faster-decaying corrections involving
          the SUDA contraction rate and the spectral gap. We also show by a smooth coun-
          terexample that tracking before polarization is not optional: removing it can trap the
          averaged iterate at a non-stationary point. We further give a linear-speedup counterex-
          ample that separates federated and fully √decentralized Muon: server-side averaging
          before polarization enjoys the usual σ/ N variance reduction, whereas local polar-
          ization before averaging does not, even under exact averaging on a complete graph.
          Experiments on CIFAR-100 and GPT-2 fine-tuning support the same qualitative pic-
          ture. On short-horizon ring benchmarks, decentralized Muon variants are often close;
          in the 20-node, 100-epoch non-IID CIFAR-100 setting both SUDA-based variants out-
          perform D E M UON, with SUDA–M UON -ED performing best, while under near-IID
          partitions the gap between different SUDA–Muon instances becomes much smaller
          and the preferred topology changes.
AMS subject classifications: 90C26, 90C25, 68W15
Key words: decentralized optimization, matrix-aware optimizer, Muon, topology separation,
convergence analysis




1 Introduction
Fully decentralized training is attractive in settings where data and compute are naturally
spread across agents and a central coordinator is either unavailable or undesirable [3, 4,
8]. In this paper, however, we are interested in a narrower question than decentralized

http://www.global-sci.org/csiam-am                   1                  ©20xx Global-Science Press
2                               ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-50


learning in general: how should one extend Muon, a matrix-structured optimizer, to a
sparse peer-to-peer network? The main obstacle is that Muon’s matrix sign operator
msgn is nonlinear, whereas decentralized communication is built from linear averaging.
Once these two operations are combined, averaging and polarization need not agree, so
the usual intuition from decentralized SGD no longer applies.
    To tackle this problem, we consider the decentralized matrix optimization problem

                                                      1 N
                                                      N i∑
                                    min f ( X ) ≜           f i ( X ),                          (1.1)
                                  X ∈ Rm × n             =1

where agent i ∈ [ N ] ≜ {1,..., N } only has access to its local objective f i and can query a
stochastic first-order oracle. At iteration k, given a local iterate Xik , agent i samples ξ ik and
obtains a stochastic gradient

                                   Gik ≜ ∇ Fi ( Xik ;ξ ik ) ∈ Rm×n ,                            (1.2)

which satisfies standard unbiasedness and bounded-variance conditions. The agents
are connected by an undirected communication graph encoded by a symmetric, dou-
bly stochastic mixing matrix W ∈ R N × N , and they can exchange messages only with their
neighbors according to W.
    In this setting, decentralized optimization already offers several correction mecha-
nisms for heterogeneity, including gradient tracking, EXTRA, and ED/D2 [8, 13, 15].
SUDA is particularly appealing because it expresses many of these schemes inside one
primal–dual recursion parameterized by three matrices ( A,B,C ) built from W [2]. On
the optimizer side, Muon replaces a coordinatewise step by a matrix polarization direc-
tion and has shown strong empirical performance in centralized and federated settings
[7, 9, 10, 14]. What is still missing is a framework that lets these two viewpoints meet
cleanly: we would like to vary the communication backbone without redesigning the
Muon update from scratch every time.
    Current decentralized Muon results do not yet provide that picture. DeMuon [6] com-
bines Muon with gradient tracking and works over general graphs, but it is built around
one specific communication template. This leaves four questions open. Can Muon be
placed inside a unified SUDA-style backbone? Can one obtain a topology-separated rate
in the nuclear-norm geometry induced by Muon, rather than an analysis in which net-
work effects and optimizer geometry are entangled from the start? Is tracking before
polarization genuinely necessary, or merely convenient? And, compared with server-
based/federated Muon, can a fully decentralized Muon update still exploit the usual
linear-speedup effect from averaging stochastic gradients?
    We answer these questions with SUDA–Muon, which keeps Muon’s matrix geometry
but places it inside the SUDA primal–dual recursion. The point is not only to obtain one
more decentralized Muon method. It is to expose which parts of the behavior come from
the communication mechanism and which parts come from the polarization step itself.
    Our contributions are the following.
ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-50                     3


      • We propose SUDA–Muon, a unified decentralized Muon framework in which the
        communication mechanism is encoded by the SUDA matrices ( A,B,C ). By choos-
        ing these matrices appropriately, the same template recovers ED/D2 , EXTRA, and
        ATC-style gradient tracking while keeping the Muon direction fixed.
      • We prove a topology-separated non-asymptotic convergence guarantee in the
        Muon-induced nuclear-norm geometry. The full five-term bound is stated in Corol-
        lary 4.1. In particular,
                             √ with suitable stepsize and EMA schedules, its dominant term
        scales as O((1 + σ/ N )K −1/4 ), while topology enters only through faster-decaying
        corrections involving the SUDA contraction rate γ and the mixing rate λ.
      • We show that tracking before polarization is structurally necessary. Via a smooth
        matrix-logistic counterexample, we prove that if each node applies msgn directly
        to its local EMA, the averaged iterate can remain fixed at a non-stationary point.
      • We give a second counterexample that isolates the difference between federated
        and fully decentralized Muon. In a simple
                                               √   noisy quadratic, server-side averaging
        before polarization yields the usual σ/ N variance reduction, whereas local polar-
        ization before averaging produces an update whose contraction rate is independent
        of N, even under exact averaging on a complete graph.
      • We evaluate the framework on CIFAR-100 classification and GPT-2 fine-tuning. The
        experiments support a more specific qualitative picture: short-horizon ring bench-
        marks do not strongly separate decentralized Muon variants, but in the 20-node,
        100-epoch non-IID CIFAR-100 setting both SUDA-based variants outperform D E -
        M UON, with SUDA–M UON -ED performing best; under near-IID partitions, the
        gap between different SUDA–Muon instances becomes much smaller and the pre-
        ferred topology changes.


2 Related Work
2.1     Matrix-Aware Optimizers and the Muon Family in Centralized Training
Muon was introduced as an optimizer that acts directly on matrix-valued parameters
through a polarization step instead of treating every layer as a flattened vector [7]. Sub-
sequent empirical work reports strong performance on modern architectures, including
large language models, and recent theory interprets Muon as steepest descent under a
spectral-norm constraint [9, 12, 16]. For our purposes, the important point is not merely
that Muon is matrix-aware, but that its update rule is nonlinear at the matrix level. That
nonlinearity is exactly what complicates decentralization.
    A broader literature studies structured optimizers such as Adafactor and Shampoo [5,
11]. These methods also exploit matrix or tensor structure, but they do not raise the same
question considered here. Our focus is narrower: how to combine Muon’s polarization
step with fully decentralized correction mechanisms over sparse graphs.
4                              ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-50


2.2   Decentralized Optimization and Heterogeneity Correction
Decentralized SGD is simple but biased under heterogeneous data. EXTRA, Exact
Diffusion/D2 , and gradient tracking were developed to remove or reduce that bias
through additional correction terms [13, 15, 17]. SUDA is especially relevant because
it places several of these methods inside one primal–dual template parameterized by
( A,B,C ), making it possible to compare communication mechanisms without redesign-
ing the algorithm each time [1, 18].
    Most of this literature, however, works in a Euclidean setting: gradients are commu-
nicated linearly, and the optimizer itself is vector-based or at most diagonally precondi-
tioned. The resulting theory says a great deal about topology and bias correction, but it
does not address what happens when the optimizer applies a nonlinear matrix transfor-
mation before the update.

2.3   Distributed Muon: Decentralized and Federated Extensions
Distributed extensions of Muon are already beginning to appear. Federated variants such
as FedMuon study star-topology settings and show that naive local Muon combined with
FedAvg can be unstable under heterogeneity, which motivates additional server-side cor-
rection [10, 14]. Those works are informative about heterogeneity, but they do not address
fully decentralized communication.
    DeMuon is, to our knowledge, the clearest fully decentralized Muon method on gen-
eral graphs [6]. It demonstrates that combining Muon with gradient tracking is viable,
but it is organized around one specific communication template. Our paper differs in em-
phasis: we ask for a unified SUDA-style backbone for Muon, a topology-separated rate
within that backbone, a direct statement that tracking before polarization is not merely
helpful but necessary in general, and an explicit counterexample separating the linear-
speedup behavior of federated and fully decentralized Muon.


3 Problem Formulation and Algorithm
3.1   Problem Setup
We consider the decentralized matrix optimization problem

                                                   1 N
                                                   N i∑
                                   min f ( X ) ≜         f i ( X ),
                                 X ∈ Rm × n           =1

where agent i ∈[ N ]≜{1,..., N } can only access its local objective f i and query a stochastic
first-order oracle. At iteration k, given Xik , agent i samples ξ ik and obtains the stochastic
gradient
                                  Gik ≜ ∇ Fi ( Xik ;ξ ik ) ∈ Rm×n .
ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-50                     5


Algorithm 1 SUDA–Muon (stacked form)
 1: Input: stepsize α > 0, EMA parameter β ∈ [0,1), mixing / SUDA matrices (W, A,B,C ).
 2: Initialize: choose X0 = col{ X10 ,...,X 0N }, set Y0 = 0.
 3: Query stochastic gradients G0 = col{ G10 ,...,GN
                                                   0 } at X0 .

 4: Set M0 : = G0 and H0 : = M0 .
 5: for k = 0,1,2,... do
 6:    Query stochastic gradients Gk = col{ G1k ,...,GN
                                                      k } at Xk .

 7:    M  k + 1     k           k
                ← βM +(1 − β) G                                                     (EMA)
 8:    H k +1 ← W H k + M k +1 − M k                                    (gradient tracking)
                                     
 9:    Xk+1 ← A CXk − α msgn(Hk+1 ) − BYk                                (SUDA backbone)
10:    Yk+1 ← Yk + BXk+1
11: end for


3.2     Algorithm Description
The framework is parameterized by the SUDA communication matrices ( A,B,C ), which
are low-degree polynomials of the mixing matrix W. Different choices recover well-
known decentralized schemes as special cases:

      • ED/D2 : A = C = W and B2 = I − W 2 .

      • EXTRA: A = C = I +2W and B2 = I −2W .

      • Gradient Tracking (ATC-GT): A = C = W and B = I − W.

Remark 3.1. DeMuon [6] uses a closely related gradient-tracking mechanism combined
with Muon directions, but applies mixing directly to the primal variables rather than
through the SUDA primal–dual backbone. Specifically, DeMuon does not maintain the
dual variable Yk and instead performs a gossip-style averaging step on Xk after the Muon
update. This subtle structural difference means DeMuon is not recovered as a special
case of Algorithm 1, but its gradient-tracking component shares the same motivations
analyzed in our convergence theory.

In all cases, the Muon polarization direction msgn(Hk+1 ) is applied after gradient track-
ing, so that the msgn operator acts on a network-aggregated quantity rather than a purely
local signal. The stacked update equations are:
                                                         
                             Xk+1 = A CXk − α msgn(Hk+1 ) − BYk ,
                             Yk+1 = Yk + BXk+1 ,
                                                                                      (3.1)
                             Mk+1 = βMk +(1 − β) Gk ,
                                                          
                             H k +1 = W H k + M k +1 − M k ,
6                              ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-50


3.3   Assumptions
We adopt standard assumptions from refined SUDA analyses and recent Muon/DeMuon
convergence analyses, adapted to matrix-valued parameters.
Assumption 1 (Network and SUDA communication structure). Let W ∈ R N × N be the
(undirected) mixing matrix associated with the communication graph. We assume:
    1. W is symmetric, doubly stochastic, and primitive. Denote the mixing rate
                                                    
                                 λ ≜ ρ W − N1 1 N 1⊤
                                                   N ∈ (0,1).



    2. The SUDA matrices A,B,C ∈ R N × N satisfy: (i) A and C are doubly stochastic; (ii)
       BZ = 0 iff Z1 = ··· = ZN for stacked variables; (iii) A, B2 , and C are (low-degree)
       polynomial functions of W.
Assumption 2 (Matrix smoothness and lower boundedness). Each local objective f i :
Rm×n → R is L∗ -smooth in the sense that for all X,Y ∈ Rm×n ,

                      ∥∇ f i ( X )−∇ f i (Y )∥∗ ≤ L∗ ∥ X − Y ∥,   ∀ i ∈ [ N ],
where ∥·∥∗ and ∥·∥ denote the nuclear norm and operator norm, respectively. Moreover,
the global objective f ( X ) ≜ N1 ∑iN=1 f i ( X ) is bounded below: f ( X ) ≥ f inf > −∞.
Assumption 3 (Stochastic first-order oracle). At each iteration k and node i, the oracle
returns Gik = ∇ Fi ( Xik ;ξ ik ) satisfying
                                                                          
                 E Gik | F k = ∇ f i ( Xik ), E ∥ Gik −∇ f i ( Xik )∥2F | F k ≤ σ2 ,

where F k is the natural filtration of the algorithm. Stochastic gradients are conditionally
independent across agents and time given F k .
Assumption 4 (Muon polarization operator). For any H ∈ Rm×n with a reduced SVD
H = UΣV ⊤ , define
                      msgn( H ) ≜ UV ⊤ ,    msgn(0) ≜ 0.                   (3.2)
Each agent uses Sik+1 = msgn( Hik+1 ) as the Muon direction, computed locally (e.g., via an
exact SVD or approximate Newton–Schulz iterations).


4     Theoretical Analysis
We present the theoretical analysis of SUDA–Muon. For the reader’s convenience, we
first state the main convergence result and its big-O simplification in Subsection 4.1,
then establish the proof ingredients and final assembly in Subsection 4.3. Subsections 4.4
and 4.5 then draw two structural consequences of this theory: how the master bound
specializes to concrete SUDA backbones, and why tracking must precede polarization.
ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-50                              7


4.1   Statement of Main Results
The following proposition provides the explicit convergence rate for SUDA–Muon.

Proposition 4.1 (Main convergence rate — informal statement). Under Assumptions 1–4
and standard SUDA stability conditions, choose the stepsize α = α0 K −3/4 and EMA parameter
1 − β = b0 K −1/2 . Then the average nuclear-norm stationarity measure of SUDA–Muon satisfies
                                                                                  

 1 K −1                               σ  −1/4        K −3/4                            
                                                                                           
 K k∑
                    k
       E  ∥∇ f ( X̄   )∥ ∗   = O    1 + √    K    +                    + lower-order terms  , (4.1)
    =0
                                          N         ( 1 − γ )( 1 − λ )                     
                                   |       {z    } |        {z        }
                                      topology-free     network-dependent


where γ ∈ (0,1) is the SUDA contraction rate and λ = ρ(W − J ) ∈ (0,1) is the mixing rate.

    The precise five-term bound, together with all constants, is given in Proposition 4.4
and its big-O simplification in Corollary 4.1. Three structural features of this result de-
serve emphasis:
                                                    √
   1. Topology separation. The leading term (1+ σ/ N )K −1/4 is entirely free of any net-
      work quantity; the communication topology affects only the faster-decaying correc-
      tion terms.

   2. Modular network dependence. Network effects enter only through (1 − γ) and
      (1 − λ), and different choices of ( A,B,C ) alter only γ, so one can compare commu-
      nication strategies by simply substituting the corresponding SUDA contraction rate
      (see Subsection 4.4).

   3. Muon-induced geometry. The stationarity measure is the nuclear norm ∥∇ f ∥∗ ,
      which is the natural dual norm for Muon’s operator-norm constraint set. This is
      fundamentally different from the Euclidean norm used in standard decentralized
      SGD analyses.

    The proof proceeds in three stages: we first derive a one-step descent inequality in
the nuclear-norm geometry, then establish the auxiliary bounds controlling EMA error,
gradient tracking, SUDA disagreement, and forcing terms, and finally assemble these
ingredients via telescoping and the chosen stepsize/EMA schedules.

4.2   Basic Properties of the Matrix Sign Operator
Lemma 4.1 (Basic properties of msgn and a robust inner-product lower bound). Let H ∈
Rm×n and define msgn( H ) as in (3.2): if H ̸= 0 has reduced SVD H = UΣV ⊤ with U ∈ Rm×r ,
V ∈ Rn×r , Σ = diag(σ1 ,...,σr ) and σi > 0, then msgn( H ) := UV ⊤ , and set msgn(0) := 0. Then
the following hold.
8                                ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-50


    1. Alignment with the nuclear norm. One has

                                        ⟨ H,msgn( H )⟩ = ∥ H ∥∗ .                                (4.2)

    2. Operator- and Frobenius-norm bounds. One has
                                            q           √
        ∥ msgn( H )∥ ≤ 1,   ∥ msgn( H )∥ F = rank( H ) ≤ rmax ,                rmax := min{m,n}.
                                                                                             (4.3)
      Moreover, if H ̸= 0 then ∥ msgn( H )∥ = 1.

    3. A key inequality (no Lipschitzness required). For any G, H ∈ Rm×n ,

                                  ⟨ G,msgn( H )⟩ ≥ ∥ G ∥∗ − 2∥ G − H ∥∗ .                        (4.4)

The proof uses only the definition (3.2), basic linear algebra, and the standard nuclear/operator
norm duality inequality

                             |⟨ A,B⟩| ≤ ∥ A∥∗ ∥ B∥,      ∀ A,B ∈ Rm×n ,                          (4.5)

where ⟨ A,B⟩ := tr( A⊤ B).
Proof. If H = 0, then msgn( H ) = 0 by definition and all claims are immediate. Hence
assume H ̸= 0 and write its reduced SVD as H = UΣV ⊤ with U ⊤ U = Ir and V ⊤ V = Ir .
Part (1): ⟨ H,msgn( H )⟩ = ∥ H ∥∗ . Using cyclicity of the trace and U ⊤ U = Ir , V ⊤ V = Ir ,
                                                                    r
⟨ H,msgn( H )⟩=tr (UΣV ⊤ )⊤ (UV ⊤ ) =tr VΣU ⊤ UV ⊤ =tr(VΣV ⊤ )=tr(Σ)= ∑ σi =∥ H ∥∗ .
                                                                                       i =1


Part (2): operator- and Frobenius-norm bounds. Set M := msgn( H ) = UV ⊤ . Then

                                   M⊤ M = VU ⊤ UV ⊤ = VV ⊤ ,

which is the orthogonal projector onto col(V ) and hence has eigenvalues in {0,1}. There-
fore
                        ∥ M∥2 = λmax ( M⊤ M) = λmax (VV ⊤ ) = 1,
so ∥ msgn( H )∥ = 1 for H ̸= 0, and the bound ∥ msgn( H )∥ ≤ 1 holds in general (including
H = 0). Moreover,

                ∥ M∥2F = tr( M⊤ M) = tr(VV ⊤ ) = rank(VV ⊤ ) = r = rank( H ),
                   p             p                √
so ∥ msgn( H )∥ F = rank( H ) ≤ min{m,n} =: rmax .
Part (3): robust inner-product lower bound. Write

                     ⟨ G,msgn( H )⟩ = ⟨ H,msgn( H )⟩+⟨ G − H,msgn( H )⟩.
ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-50                              9


By Part (1), ⟨ H,msgn( H )⟩ = ∥ H ∥∗ . For the second term, apply the duality inequality (4.5)
with A = G − H and B = msgn( H ), together with Part (2) (∥ msgn( H )∥ ≤ 1), to obtain

      ⟨ G − H,msgn( H )⟩ ≥ −|⟨ G − H,msgn( H )⟩| ≥ −∥ G − H ∥∗ ∥ msgn( H )∥ ≥ −∥ G − H ∥∗ .

Consequently,
                                   ⟨ G,msgn( H )⟩ ≥ ∥ H ∥∗ −∥ G − H ∥∗ .                        (4.6)
Finally, by the triangle inequality for the nuclear norm,

                             ∥ G ∥∗ = ∥ H +( G − H )∥∗ ≤ ∥ H ∥∗ +∥ G − H ∥∗ ,

which rearranges to ∥ H ∥∗ ≥ ∥ G ∥∗ −∥ G − H ∥∗ . Plugging this into (4.6) yields

             ⟨ G,msgn( H )⟩ ≥ (∥ G ∥∗ −∥ G − H ∥∗ )−∥ G − H ∥∗ = ∥ G ∥∗ − 2∥ G − H ∥∗ ,

which is (4.4).

4.3     Proof Ingredients and Main Proofs
This subsection develops the technical ingredients behind the master rate and then as-
sembles them into the final convergence bound.

One-Step Descent Analysis
Lemma 4.2 (Averaged SUDA–Muon dynamics). Suppose Assumption 1 holds and the iterates
are generated by (3.1) with initialization Yi0 = 0 for all i ∈ [ N ]. Define the averages

                           1 N k                   1 N k +1
                           N i∑                    N i∑
                  X̄ k ≜         Xi ,    S̄k+1 ≜         Si ,          Sik+1 = msgn( Hik+1 ).
                              =1                      =1

Then, for all k ≥ 0,
                                           X̄ k+1 = X̄ k − α S̄k+1 .                            (4.7)
Proof. Let 1 ∈ R N denote the all-ones vector and set
                                                1 ⊤
                                           J≜     11 ∈ R N × N .
                                                N
For a stacked variable Z = col{ Z1 ,...,ZN } (with matrix blocks Zi ∈ Rm×n ), JZ has all blocks
equal to the average Z̄ ≜ N1 ∑i Zi .
   From (3.1),                                             
                          Xk+1 = A CXk − α msgn(Hk+1 ) − BYk .

Left-multiplying by J and using that A and C are doubly stochastic (Assumption 1(2)(i)),
hence J A = J and JC = J, yields

                                 JXk+1 = JXk − α J msgn(Hk+1 )− JBYk .                          (4.8)
10                                  ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-50


We claim that JBYk = 0 for all k ≥ 0 under Y0 = 0. Indeed, define the row vector b⊤ ≜ N1 1⊤ B
and the stacked linear functional uk ≜ b⊤ Yk ∈ Rm×n . From the dual update Yk+1 = Yk +
BXk+1 ,
                         uk+1 = uk + b⊤ BXk+1 = uk + N1 1⊤ B2 Xk+1 .
By Assumption 1(2)(ii), for every consensus stacked variable Z = col{ Z,...,Z } (with an
arbitrary block Z ∈Rm×n ), we have BZ=0. Writing the i-th block of BZ as ( BZ)i =∑ N
                                                                                   j=1 bij Z,
               N
we obtain (∑ j=1 bij ) Z = 0 for every Z. Choosing any nonzero Z (e.g., a basis matrix)
implies ∑ N
          j=1 bij = 0 for all i, i.e.,
                                          B1 = 0.                                      (4.9)
Consequently, B2 1 = 0.
   Next, by Assumption 1(2)(iii), there exists a polynomial p such that B2 = p(W ). Since
W is doubly stochastic, W1 = 1 and 1⊤ W = 1⊤ , hence p(W )1 = p(1)1 and 1⊤ p(W )= p(1)1⊤ .
From B2 1 = p(W )1 = 0 we conclude p(1) = 0, and therefore

                                     1⊤ B2 = 1⊤ p(W ) = p(1)1⊤ = 0.                                (4.10)

Therefore b⊤ B = N1 1⊤ B2 = 0, and thus uk+1 = uk . Since Y0 = 0, we get u0 = 0 and hence
uk ≡ 0 for all k. Finally,
                                      1
                               JBYk = 1 (1⊤ BYk ) = 1uk = 0.
                                      N
Substituting JBYk = 0 into (4.8) and taking the common block yields X̄ k+1 = X̄ k − αS̄k+1 ,
which is (4.7).

Lemma 4.3 (One-step descent of f ( X̄ k ) with Muon direction and tracking error). Suppose
Assumptions 1 and 2 hold, the iterates are generated by (3.1), and Yi0 = 0 for all i ∈ [ N ] (as in
Algorithm 1). Let ( X̄ k )k≥0 be the averaged iterates defined in Lemma 4.2. Then, for all k ≥ 0,

                                                             L∗ α2 2α N
            f ( X̄ k+1 ) ≤ f ( X̄ k )− α ∥∇ f ( X̄ k )∥∗ +        + ∑ ∥∇ f ( X̄ k )− Hik+1 ∥∗ .    (4.11)
                                                              2    N i =1

Here and throughout, ⟨ A,B⟩ := tr( A⊤ B) denotes the matrix inner product.

Proof. Step 1: a descent lemma under Assumption 2. Since f ( X ) = N1 ∑iN=1 f i ( X ), As-
sumption 2 implies that for all X,Y,

                      1 N                               1 N
∥∇ f ( X )−∇ f (Y )∥∗ = ∑
                      N i =1
                             ∇ f i ( X )−∇ f i (Y ) ≤ ∑ ∥∇ f i ( X )−∇ f i (Y )∥∗ ≤ L∗ ∥ X −Y ∥.
                                                     ∗ N i =1
                                                                                          (4.12)
Fix X,Y ∈ Rm×n and let D := Y − X. Define g(t) := f ( X + tD ) for t ∈ [0,1]. Then g is differ-
entiable and
                                  g′ (t) = ⟨∇ f ( X + tD ),D ⟩.
ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-50                                11


Using the fundamental theorem of calculus,
                                                              Z 1
                       f (Y )− f ( X ) = g(1)− g(0) =               ⟨∇ f ( X + tD ),D ⟩ dt.       (4.13)
                                                                0

Add and subtract ∇ f ( X ) inside the integrand to obtain
                                                      Z 1
                f (Y )− f ( X ) = ⟨∇ f ( X ),D ⟩+           ⟨∇ f ( X + tD )−∇ f ( X ),D ⟩ dt.
                                                       0

By the nuclear/operator duality inequality |⟨ A,B⟩|≤∥ A∥∗ ∥ B∥ and (4.12), for each t ∈[0,1],
                  ⟨∇ f ( X + tD )−∇ f ( X ),D ⟩ ≤ |⟨∇ f ( X + tD )−∇ f ( X ),D ⟩|
                                                ≤ ∥∇ f ( X + tD )−∇ f ( X )∥∗ ∥ D ∥
                                                      ≤ L∗ ∥tD ∥∥ D ∥ = L∗ t ∥ D ∥2 .
Plugging this into (4.13) gives the descent inequality
                                                                         L∗
                           f (Y ) ≤ f ( X )+⟨∇ f ( X ),Y − X ⟩+             ∥Y − X ∥ 2 .          (4.14)
                                                                         2

Step 2: apply (4.14) to the averaged recursion. By Lemma 4.2, X̄ k+1 = X̄ k − αS̄k+1 with
S̄k+1 = N1 ∑iN=1 Sik+1 and Sik+1 = msgn( Hik+1 ). Applying (4.14) with X = X̄ k and Y = X̄ k+1
yields
                                                                            L ∗ α 2 k +1 2
                       f ( X̄ k+1 ) ≤ f ( X̄ k )− α ⟨∇ f ( X̄ k ), S̄k+1 ⟩+        ∥S̄ ∥ . (4.15)
                                                                              2
Moreover, by Lemma 4.1(2), ∥Sik+1 ∥ ≤ 1 for all i, and by convexity of the operator norm,

                                            1 N k +1   1 N
                             ∥S̄k+1 ∥ =       ∑
                                            N i =1
                                                   Si ≤ ∑ ∥Sik+1 ∥ ≤ 1.
                                                       N i =1
                                                                                                  (4.16)

Combining (4.15) and (4.16) gives
                                                                                   L ∗ α2
                            f ( X̄ k+1 ) ≤ f ( X̄ k )− α ⟨∇ f ( X̄ k ), S̄k+1 ⟩+          .       (4.17)
                                                                                     2

Step 3: lower bound ⟨∇ f ( X̄ k ), S̄k+1 ⟩ via Lemma 4.1. Let G := ∇ f ( X̄ k ). For each agent i,
Lemma 4.1(3) with H = Hik+1 gives

                     ⟨ G,Sik+1 ⟩ = ⟨ G,msgn( Hik+1 )⟩ ≥ ∥ G ∥∗ − 2 ∥ G − Hik+1 ∥∗ .

Averaging over i and using ⟨ G, S̄k+1 ⟩ = N1 ∑iN=1 ⟨ G,Sik+1 ⟩ yields

                                                                2 N
                                                                N i∑
                   ⟨∇ f ( X̄ k ), S̄k+1 ⟩ ≥ ∥∇ f ( X̄ k )∥∗ −         ∥∇ f ( X̄ k )− Hik+1 ∥∗ .   (4.18)
                                                                   =1

Substituting (4.18) into (4.17) gives (4.11).
12                                     ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-50


Proposition 4.2 (Descent inequality with an explicit “tracking-error” remainder). Suppose
the assumptions of Lemma 4.3 hold. Then for any integer K ≥ 1,

         1 K −1                  ∆0 L ∗ α    2 K −1 N                          
           ∑
         K k =0
                E ∥∇ f ( X̄ k )∥∗ ≤
                                    αK
                                       +
                                         2
                                            +    ∑   ∑
                                              NK k=0 i=1
                                                         E ∥∇ f ( X̄ k )− Hik+1 ∥∗ ,                  (4.19)

where ∆0 := E[ f ( X̄ 0 )]− f inf .
Proof. Sum the one-step inequality (4.11) from Lemma 4.3 over k = 0,...,K − 1, take expec-
tations, and use E[ f ( X̄ K )] ≥ f inf . Divide by αK.

EMA and Gradient Tracking Foundations
Lemma 4.4 (EMA stochastic error (per-agent and averaged)). Suppose Assumption 3 holds
and the iterates are generated by (3.1) (equivalently, Algorithm 1). Fix any agent i ∈ [ N ]. Define
Ci0 := ∇ f i ( Xi0 ) and for k ≥ 0,

                                        Cik+1 := βCik +(1 − β)∇ f i ( Xik ),

and recall that Mi0 = Gi0 and Mik+1 = βMik +(1 − β) Gik . Then, for all k ≥ 0,
                                                  q
                                                    1− β
                                E ∥Cik − Mik ∥ F ≤ 1+ β σ + βk σ.                                     (4.20)

Moreover, defining the averages M̄k := N1 ∑iN=1 Mik and C̄ k := N1 ∑iN=1 Cik , we have for all k ≥ 0,
                                                q
                                                   1− β
                             E ∥C̄ k − M̄k ∥ F ≤ 1+ β √σ + βk √σ .                                (4.21)
                                                                   N           N

Finally, letting rmax := min{m,n}, for all k ≥ 0,
                                               √
                             E ∥Cik − Mik ∥∗ ≤ rmax E ∥Cik − Mik ∥ F .                                (4.22)

Proof. Throughout, define the stochastic gradient noise

                                             ∆ik := Gik −∇ f i ( Xik ).

Then Assumption 3 implies

                                  E[∆ik | F k ] = 0,     E[∥∆ik ∥2F | F k ] ≤ σ2 .                    (4.23)

Step 1: per-agent EMA error. Let Eik := Cik − Mik . By the definitions of Cik+1 and Mik+1 ,
                                                          
                  Eik+1 = βEik +(1 − β) ∇ f i ( Xik )− Gik = βEik −(1 − β)∆ik .         (4.24)

Unrolling (4.24) gives, for any k ≥ 0,
                                  k −1                                               
                     Eik = (1 − β) ∑ βk−1−t ∇ f i ( Xit )− Git + βk ∇ f i ( Xi0 )− Gi0 .              (4.25)
                                      t =0
ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-50                                                  13


Taking Frobenius norms, using the triangle inequality and Cauchy–Schwarz,
                             k −1                               
    E∥ Eik ∥ F ≤ (1 − β) E   ∑ βk−1−t ∇ fi (Xit )− Git                  F
                                                                            + βk E∥∇ f i ( Xi0 )− Gi0 ∥ F
                             t =0
                        v
                        u k −1                                 q
                        u                               2
             ≤ (1 − β ) tE      ∑
                               βk−1−t ∇ f ( X t )− G t
                                                 i       i + βk E∥∇ f ( X 0 )− G0 ∥2 .
                                                                    i                           i    i      i   F   (4.26)
                                t =0                                         F


The second term is bounded by βk σ using (4.23). For the first term, note that for s < t, by
the tower property and (4.23),
                                                             
                    E ∇ f i ( Xis )− Gis , ∇ f i ( Xit )− Git
                        h                                                i
                     = E E ∇ f i ( Xis )− Gis , ∇ f i ( Xit )− Git | F t
                        h                                                 i
                     = E ∇ f i ( Xis )− Gis , E[∇ f i ( Xit )− Git | F t ] = 0.
                                              |            {z           }
                                                                        =0

Hence all cross terms vanish in the expansion of the squared norm, and therefore
                k −1                            2       k −1
            E   ∑ βk−1−t ∇ fi (Xit )− Git        F
                                                     = ∑ β2(k−1−t) E∥∇ f i ( Xit )− Git ∥2F
                t =0                                     t =0
                                                             k −1
                                                                                           1 − β2k     σ2
                                                     ≤ σ 2 ∑ β 2( k −1− t ) = σ 2               2
                                                                                                   ≤        .
                                                             t =0                          1− β      1 − β2

Plugging this into (4.26) yields
                                                                                 q
                                                     σ                               1− β
                        E∥ Eik ∥ F ≤ (1 − β) p               + βk σ =                          k
                                                                                     1+ β σ + β σ,
                                                 1 − β2
which proves (4.20).
                                            √
Step 2: averaged EMA error and the 1/ N factor. Let Ēk := C̄ k − M̄k = N1 ∑iN=1 Eik and
¯ k := 1 ∑ N ∆k . Averaging (4.24) over i gives
∆      N i =1 i

                                                               ¯ k.
                                         Ēk+1 = β Ēk −(1 − β)∆                                                    (4.27)

We now bound the second moment of ¯       ∆k . By Assumption 3, conditional on F k the random
           k  N
matrices {∆i }i=1 are independent across agents and satisfy (4.23). Therefore, conditional on
F k,
                                   h     N          i   1 N  k 2
                    ¯ ∥ F | F k = E 1 ∑ ∆k
                   k 2                      2                                 
                 E ∥∆
                                     N i =1 i
                                              F
                                                F k
                                                      =  2 ∑
                                                        N i =1
                                                               E ∥ ∆i ∥ F | F k                                     (4.28)

                                        σ2
                                    ≤      .
                                        N
14                               ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-50


Equality (4.28) is exactly where the conditional independence across agents is used: it
removes the cross terms ⟨∆ik ,∆kj ⟩ for i ̸= j. Consequently, by Jensen,
                                                q
                                     ¯ k ∥F ≤
                                  E∥ ∆                 ¯ k ∥2 ≤ √σ .
                                                    E∥ ∆                                        (4.29)
                                                            F
                                                                  N

Now apply the same argument as in Step 1 to the recursion (4.27), using (4.28) (in place
of (4.23) with σ2 ), to obtain
                                           q
                                             1− β σ      σ
                               E∥ Ēk ∥ F ≤ 1+ β √ + βk √ ,
                                                   N      N

which is (4.21).
Step 3: nuclear norm conversion. For any matrix A ∈ Rm×n with singular values (s j )rj= 1,
                                                                                      max



                                rmax
                                        √     rmax 1/2 √
                         ∥ A∥∗ = ∑ s j ≤ rmax ∑ s2j     = rmax ∥ A∥ F ,
                                j =1                 j =1


where the inequality is Cauchy–Schwarz. Applying this pointwise with A = Eik and taking
expectations gives (4.22).

Lemma 4.5 (Gradient tracking preserves network averages). Suppose Assumption 1(1)
holds (in particular, W is doubly stochastic) and the gradient-tracking variable is updated as
in (3.1):
                                                        
                           H k +1 = W H k + M k +1 − M k ,   k ≥ 0.
Assume the initialization satisfies Hi0 = Mi0 for all i ∈ [ N ] (equivalently, H0 = M0 ). Define the
network averages
                                     1 N                     1 N
                              H̄ k ≜ ∑ Hik ,        M̄k ≜ ∑ Mik .
                                     N i =1                  N i =1
Then, for all k ≥ 0,
                                             H̄ k = M̄k .
In particular, for all k ≥ 0,
                                                              
                                   H̄ k+1 = H̄ k + M̄k+1 − M̄k .

Proof. Let 1 ∈ R N denote the all-ones vector and set

                                            1 ⊤
                                       J≜     11 ∈ R N × N .
                                            N
For any stacked variable Z = col{ Z1 ,...,ZN } (with matrix blocks Zi ∈ Rm×n ), the stacked
vector JZ has all blocks equal to the average Z̄ ≜ N1 ∑i Zi .
ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-50                       15


    Since W is doubly stochastic, we have 1⊤ W = 1⊤ , and thus

                                         1           1
                                  JW =     1(1⊤ W ) = 11⊤ = J.
                                         N           N
Left-multiplying the gradient-tracking recursion by J and using JW = J yields
                                                                   
                       JHk+1 = JW Hk + Mk+1 − Mk = J Hk + Mk+1 − Mk
                                                
                             = JHk + JMk+1 − JMk ,   ∀k ≥ 0.

Taking the common block of both sides (equivalently, premultiplying by N1 1⊤ ) gives
                                                         
                              H̄ k+1 = H̄ k + M̄k+1 − M̄k ,       ∀k ≥ 0.

By the initialization H̄ 0 = M̄0 , the above identity telescopes to
                                                            
                                     H̄ k − M̄k = H̄ 0 − M̄0 = 0,

for every k ≥ 0. Hence H̄ k = M̄k for all k ≥ 0.

Lemma 4.6 (Gradient-tracking disagreement recursion). Suppose Assumption 1(1) holds
and the gradient-tracking variable obeys
                                                        
                           H k +1 = W H k + M k +1 − M k , k ≥ 0.

Let 1 N ∈ R N be the all-ones vector and define
                                        N×N
                       J ≜ N1 1 N 1⊤
                                   N ∈R     ,      Z̃k ≜ ( I − J )Zk = Zk − JZk .

Then, for all k ≥ 0,
                               ∥H̃k+1 ∥ F ≤ λ H̃k +(M̃k+1 − M̃k ) F ,
                 
where λ ≜ ρ W − J ∈(0,1) is the mixing rate from Assumption 1(1). Consequently, for any η > 0,

                   ∥H̃k+1 ∥2F ≤ (1 + η )λ2 ∥H̃k ∥2F +(1 + 1/η )λ2 ∥M̃k+1 − M̃k ∥2F .

Proof. Since W is doubly stochastic, we have W1 N = 1 N and 1⊤      ⊤
                                                             N W = 1 N , which imply

                                1
             W J = N1 W1 N 1⊤          ⊤
                            N = N 1 N 1 N = J,       JW = N1 1 N (1⊤       1      ⊤
                                                                   N W ) = N 1 N 1 N = J.

Therefore,
                                   ( I − J )W = W − JW = W − J.
Left-multiplying the gradient-tracking recursion by ( I − J ) gives
                                                                                
      H̃k+1 = ( I − J )Hk+1 = ( I − J )W Hk + Mk+1 − Mk = (W − J ) Hk + Mk+1 − Mk .
16                                ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-50


Moreover, for any stacked variable Z we can decompose Z = JZ +( I − J )Z, and since
(W − J ) J = W J − J 2 = J − J = 0, we have

                             (W − J )Z = (W − J )( I − J )Z = (W − J )Z̃.

Applying this identity to Hk and Mk+1 − Mk yields
                                                                   
                               H̃k+1 = (W − J ) H̃k +(M̃k+1 − M̃k ) .

Next, view a stacked variable Z = col{ Z1 ,...,ZN } (with matrix blocks Zi ∈ Rm×n ) as a
vector by vectorization. Then the action of W − J on the agent index corresponds to the
linear map ((W − J )⊗ Imn ) on vec(Z), and

∥(W − J )Z∥ F = ∥((W − J )⊗ Imn ) vec(Z)∥2 ≤ ∥(W − J )⊗ Imn ∥2 ∥vec(Z)∥2 = ∥W − J ∥2 ∥Z∥ F .

Because W is symmetric, W − J is also symmetric. Hence its spectral norm equals its
spectral radius:
                   ∥W − J ∥2 = max |λi (W − J )| = ρ(W − J ) = λ.
                                           i

Combining the last two displays gives

                               ∥H̃k+1 ∥ F ≤ λ H̃k +(M̃k+1 − M̃k ) F .

Finally, squaring and using the standard inequality ∥U + V ∥2F ≤ (1 + η )∥U ∥2F +(1 +
1/η )∥V ∥2F (valid for any η > 0) with U = H̃k and V = M̃k+1 − M̃k yields
                                                           2
                   ∥H̃k+1 ∥2F ≤ λ2 H̃k +(M̃k+1 − M̃k ) F
                              ≤ (1 + η )λ2 ∥H̃k ∥2F +(1 + 1/η )λ2 ∥M̃k+1 − M̃k ∥2F .

This proves the claim.

SUDA Backbone Analysis
Lemma 4.7 (SUDA backbone disagreement bound with bounded input directions). Sup-
pose Assumption 1 holds. Consider the primal–dual recursion (stacked form)
                                                      
                              Xk+1 = A CXk − αUk+1 − BYk ,
                                                                           (4.30)
                              Yk+1 = Yk + BXk+1 ,

where α >0 and Uk+1 =col{U1k+1 ,...,UN      k +1
                                                 } is an arbitrary (possibly time-varying) stacked input.
Let J := N1 11⊤ and Z̃ := ( I − J )Z. Assume Y0 = 0.
    Assume additionally that the corresponding SUDA deviation matrix (defined in the proof)
is stable, i.e., all of its eigenvalues are strictly inside the unit circle. Then there exist network-
dependent constants
                              γ ∈ (0,1),      v1 ≥ 1,       v2 ≥ 1,     λ a ≥ 0,
ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-50                                             17


(depending only on A,B,C and the network) such that for all k ≥ 0,
                                                                     
                         ∥X̃k ∥ F ≤ v1 v2 γk ∥X̃0 ∥ F +∥ B2 ∥∥X̃0 ∥ F
                                                   αv1 v2 λ a                                                 (4.31)
                                              +               sup ∥Ũt+1 ∥ F .
                                                    1 − γ 0≤ t ≤ k

If, moreover, Uk+1 = msgn(Hk+1 ) is the blockwise matrix-sign (Muon) direction from (3.1), then
Lemma 4.1 implies                    √
                       ∥Ũk+1 ∥ F ≤ 2 Nrmax ,      rmax := min{m,n},                     (4.32)
and thus
                                                            2αv1 v2 λ a √
                    ∥X̃k ∥ F ≤ v1 v2 γk 1 +∥ B2 ∥ ∥X̃0 ∥ F +               Nrmax .
                                                               1−γ

Proof. Step 1: a non-incremental form involving B2 only. Define

                            zk ≜ Yk − BXk ,                   sk ≜ Bzk = BYk − B2 Xk .

Substituting Yk = zk + BXk into (4.30) yields

                               Xk+1 = ( AC − B2 )Xk − αAUk+1 − Bzk ,                                         (4.33a)
                                   k +1       k           k
                               z          = z + BX .                                                         (4.33b)

Multiplying (4.33b) by B and using the definition of sk gives

                                Xk+1 = ( AC − B2 )Xk − αAUk+1 − sk ,                                         (4.34a)
                                     k +1      k      2       k
                                s           = s +B X .                                                       (4.34b)

Step 2: restriction to the disagreement subspace. Let Z̃:=( I − J )Z. Since A,C,B2 are poly-
nomials in W (Assumption 1(2)(iii)) and W is doubly stochastic, these matrices commute
with J and preserve the consensus/disagreement decomposition; in particular, g    AZ = AZ̃,
f = C Z̃, and B2
CZ              g Z = B2 Z̃. Applying ( I − J ) to (4.34) yields

                                X̃k+1 = ( AC − B2 )X̃k − αAŨk+1 − s̃k ,                                     (4.35a)
                                     k +1      k      2       k
                                s̃          = s̃ + B X̃ .                                                    (4.35b)

Step 3: diagonalization in the eigenbasis of W. Since W is symmetric, it admits an
orthogonal eigendecomposition W = Udiag(1, Λ̂)U ⊤ with U = [ √1 1, Û ] and Û Û ⊤ = I − J.
                                                                                         N
Because A,C,B2 are polynomials in W, they share the eigenvectors of W and thus can be
decomposed as

         A = Udiag(1, Λ̂ a ) U ⊤ ,           C = Udiag(1, Λ̂c ) U ⊤ ,           B2 = Udiag(0, Λ̂2b ) U ⊤ ,
18                                     ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-50


for some diagonal Λ̂ a , Λ̂c , Λ̂2b ∈ R( N −1)×( N −1) . Define the projected variables

                          X̂k ≜ Û ⊤ Xk ,                ŝk ≜ Û ⊤ sk ,     Ûk+1 ≜ Û ⊤ Ũk+1 .

Then (4.35) is equivalent to

                                X̂k+1 = (Λ̂ a Λ̂c − Λ̂2b )X̂k − ŝk − αΛ̂ a Ûk+1 ,                   (4.36a)
                                     k +1
                                ŝ          = ŝ + Λ̂2b X̂k .
                                                   k
                                                                                                      (4.36b)
                                                                 
Introduce the augmented state ξ̂ k := X̂k ; ŝ and the deviation matrix
                                                                k

                                                           
                                        Λ̂ a Λ̂c − Λ̂2b − I
                                  G≜                          .
                                              Λ̂2b       I

Then                                                                         
                                                  k +1          k  Λ̂ a Ûk+1
                                             ξ̂          = Gξ̂ − α              .                       (4.37)
                                                                         0
By the stability assumption on G, there exist an invertible matrix V̂ and a matrix Γ such
that G = V̂ΓV̂ −1 and ∥Γ∥ =: γ < 1. Define v1 := ∥V̂ ∥, v2 := ∥V̂ −1 ∥, and λ a := ∥Λ̂ a ∥.
Step 4: contraction and unrolling. Let êk := V̂ −1 ξ̂ k . Multiplying (4.37) by V̂ −1 gives
                                                            k +1
                                                                  
                                k +1      k      −1 Λ̂ a Û
                             ê      = Γê − αV̂                    .
                                                           0

Taking Frobenius norms and using ∥Ûk+1 ∥ F ≤ ∥Ũk+1 ∥ F yields

                                     ∥êk+1 ∥ F ≤ γ∥êk ∥ F + αv2 λ a ∥Ũk+1 ∥ F .

Unrolling gives
                                                                    αv2 λ a
                               ∥êk ∥ F ≤ γk ∥ê0 ∥ F +                     sup ∥Ũt+1 ∥ F .
                                                                    1 − γ 0≤ t ≤ k

Since ξ̂ k = V̂ êk , we have ∥X̂k ∥ F ≤ ∥ξ̂ k ∥ F ≤ v1 ∥êk ∥ F and ∥ê0 ∥ F ≤ v2 ∥ξ̂ 0 ∥ F . Moreover, Y0 = 0
implies s0 = − B2 X0 and hence ŝ0 = −Λ̂2b X̂0 . Therefore ∥ξ̂ 0 ∥ F ≤ (1 +∥Λ̂2b ∥)∥X̂0 ∥ F ≤ (1 +
∥ B2 ∥)∥X̃0 ∥ F . Finally, since Û Û ⊤ = I − J we have ∥X̂k ∥ F = ∥X̃k ∥ F . Combining these bounds
yields (4.31).
Step 5: boundedness of the Muon directions. If Uk+1 = msgn(Hk+1 ), then by Lemma 4.1,
                                 √
each block satisfies ∥Uik+1 ∥ F ≤ rmax . Thus
                                                     v
                                                     uN
                                                     u                √
        ∥Ũ ∥ F ≤ ∥U ∥ F +∥ JU ∥ F ≤ 2∥U ∥ F ≤ 2t ∑ ∥Uik+1 ∥2F ≤ 2 Nrmax ,
           k +1        k +1        k +1       k +1

                                                                                    i =1

which is (4.32).
ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-50                                        19


Drift, Mismatch, and Tracking Error Decomposition
Lemma 4.8 (EMA bias for averaged true gradients (drift term)). Suppose Assumption 2
holds. Define the averaged true gradient at the local iterates

                                                     1 N
                                                     N i∑
                                        ∇f(Xk ) ≜          ∇ f i ( Xik ),
                                                        =1

and the averaged EMA of true gradients by

                   C̄0 := ∇f(X0 ),         C̄ k+1 := β C̄ k +(1 − β)∇f(Xk ),         k ≥ 0.

Define the (one-step-ahead) EMA bias

                                    D k ≜ ∇f(Xk )− C̄ k+1 ,          k ≥ 0.

Then, for all k ≥ 0, D k obeys the recursion
                                                                  
                                D k+1 = βD k + β ∇f(Xk+1 )−∇f(Xk ) .

Moreover, for all k ≥ 0,

                                                            L∗ N
                                                            N i∑
                             ∇f(Xk+1 )−∇f(Xk ) ∗ ≤                ∥ Xik+1 − Xik ∥.                       (4.38)
                                                               =1

If, in addition, the iterates are generated by Algorithm 1, then

                 1 N                                         1              1
                 N i∑
                       ∥ Xik+1 − Xik ∥ ≤ ∥ X̄ k+1 − X̄ k ∥+ √ ∥X̃k+1 ∥ F + √ ∥X̃k ∥ F ,                  (4.39)
                    =1                                        N              N

where X̄ k := N1 ∑i Xik and X̃k := ( I − J )Xk with J := N1 11⊤ . Consequently, using Lemmas 4.2
and 4.3 (which imply ∥ X̄ k+1 − X̄ k ∥ ≤ α), we have for all k ≥ 0,
                                   βL∗         2                              
                        ∥ D k ∥∗ ≤         α + √ sup ∥X̃t+1 ∥ F +∥X̃t ∥ F .                              (4.40)
                                   1− β          N t ≥0
                                                                                                      √
In particular, if Lemma 4.7 holds (so that for all t ≥ 0, ∥X̃t ∥ F ≤ v1 v2 γt ∥X̃0 ∥ F + 2αv1−
                                                                                             1 v2 λ a
                                                                                                γ       Nrmax ),
then for all k ≥ 0,
                                       "                                           #
                          k       βL∗        4v1 v2 0         8αv1 v2 λ a √
                      ∥ D ∥∗ ≤           α + √ ∥X̃ ∥ F +                      rmax .                     (4.41)
                                  1− β          N                 1−γ

Proof. Throughout, abbreviate gk := ∇f(Xk ).
Step 1: bias recursion. By the definition of D k+1 and the EMA update,
                                                                                
           D k+1 = gk+1 − C̄ k+2 = gk+1 − βC̄ k+1 +(1 − β) gk+1 = β gk+1 − C̄ k+1 .
20                                  ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-50


Next, add and subtract gk and use D k = gk − C̄ k+1 to obtain
                                                                    
                   gk+1 − C̄ k+1 = gk+1 − gk + gk − C̄ k+1 = gk+1 − gk + D k .

Combining the last two displays yields
                                                                 
                                       D k+1 = βD k + β gk+1 − gk ,

as claimed.
Step 2: bound the averaged true-gradient drift by smoothness. By convexity of ∥·∥∗
and Assumption 2,

                                                 1 N                                  
                         ∥ g k +1 − g k ∥ ∗ =      ∑
                                                 N i =1
                                                        ∇ f i ( Xik+1 )−∇ f i ( Xik )
                                                                                        ∗

                                                1 N
                                                N i∑
                                          ≤           ∥∇ f i ( Xik+1 )−∇ f i ( Xik )∥∗
                                                   =1
                                                L∗ N
                                                N i∑
                                          ≤           ∥ Xik+1 − Xik ∥,
                                                   =1

which is (4.38).
Step 3: bound the average step size by the average motion and consensus errors. For
each i, insert and subtract the averages X̄ k+1 and X̄ k and use triangle inequality:

                   ∥ Xik+1 − Xik ∥ ≤ ∥ Xik+1 − X̄ k+1 ∥+∥ X̄ k+1 − X̄ k ∥+∥ X̄ k − Xik ∥.

Averaging over i yields

         1 N                                        1 N                   1 N
           ∑
         N i =1
                ∥ Xik+1 − Xik ∥ ≤ ∥ X̄ k+1 − X̄ k ∥+ ∑ ∥ Xik+1 − X̄ k+1 ∥+ ∑ ∥ Xik − X̄ k ∥.
                                                    N i =1                N i =1

For the disagreement terms, use ∥ A∥ ≤ ∥ A∥ F and Cauchy–Schwarz:

1 N                    1 N                    1 N                     1/2    1            2
  ∑
N i =1
       ∥ Xik − X̄ k ∥ ≤ ∑ ∥ Xik − X̄ k ∥ F ≤ √
                       N i =1                    ∑
                                               N i =1
                                                      ∥ Xik − X̄ k ∥2F      = √ ∥X̃k ∥ F ≤ √ ∥X̃k ∥ F .
                                                                                N            N

The same bound holds with k replaced by k + 1, yielding (4.39).
Step 4: unroll the bias recursion. Combine the recursion from Step 1, the drift
bound (4.38), and the step-size bound (4.39) to get
                                                                                         
              ∥ D k+1 ∥∗ ≤ β∥ Dk ∥∗ + βL∗ ∥ X̄ k+1 − X̄ k ∥+ √2N ∥X̃k+1 ∥ F + √2N ∥X̃k ∥ F .
ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-50                               21


Under Algorithm 1, Lemma 4.2 gives ∥ X̄ k+1 − X̄ k ∥ = α∥S̄k+1 ∥, and Lemma 4.3 (specifi-
cally (4.16) therein) implies ∥S̄k+1 ∥ ≤ 1, hence ∥ X̄ k+1 − X̄ k ∥ ≤ α. Moreover, D0 = g0 − C̄1 = 0
because C̄0 = g0 . Unrolling the above linear recursion and bounding the geometric series
yields

               k −1                                     βL                                   
                                                             ∗
∥ D k ∥∗ ≤ βL∗ ∑ βk−1−t α+ √2N ∥X̃t+1 ∥ F + √2N ∥X̃t ∥ F ≤      α+ √2 sup(∥X̃t+1 ∥ F +∥X̃t ∥ F ) ,
               t =0                                        1− β      N
                                                                       t ≥0

which proves (4.40).
Step 5: plug in the SUDA consensus bound (Lemma 4.7). Lemma 4.7 implies for all
t ≥ 0,
                                                  2αv1 v2 λ a √
                      ∥X̃t ∥ F ≤ v1 v2 ∥X̃0 ∥ F +               Nrmax ,
                                                    1−γ
since γt ≤ 1. Therefore,

                                                                        4αv1 v2 λ a √
                    sup(∥X̃t+1 ∥ F +∥X̃t ∥ F ) ≤ 2v1 v2 ∥X̃0 ∥ F +                    Nrmax .
                    t ≥0                                                  1−γ

Substituting this into (4.40) and simplifying gives (4.41).

Lemma 4.9 (Consensus-induced gradient mismatch). Assume Assumption 2. For any
stacked primal iterate Xk = col{ X1k ,...,X N
                                            k }, define


                                        N
                           X̄ k := N1 ∑ Xik ,        X̃k := ( I − J )Xk ,   J := N1 11⊤ .
                                       i =1

Then the mismatch between the gradient at the averaged point and the average of local gradients
at local points satisfies

                                                1 N                    L∗
                               ∇ f ( X̄ k )−      ∑
                                                N i =1
                                                       ∇ f i ( Xik ) ≤ √ ∥X̃k ∥ F .
                                                                    ∗   N
                                                                                                 (4.42)


Proof. Using ∇ f ( X̄ k ) = N1 ∑iN=1 ∇ f i ( X̄ k ), we write

                                      1 N                   1 N                            
                      ∇ f ( X̄ k )−     ∑
                                      N i =1
                                             ∇ f i ( Xik ) = ∑ ∇ f i ( X̄ k )−∇ f i ( Xik ) .
                                                            N i =1

By convexity of the nuclear norm and the triangle inequality,

                                    1 N                    1 N
                    ∇ f ( X̄ k )−     ∑
                                    N i =1
                                           ∇ f i ( Xik ) ≤ ∑ ∥∇ f i ( X̄ k )−∇ f i ( Xik )∥∗ .
                                                         ∗ N i =1
22                                      ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-50


By Assumption 2, ∥∇ f i ( X̄ k )−∇ f i ( Xik )∥∗ ≤ L∗ ∥ X̄ k − Xik ∥. Moreover, ∥ X̄ k − Xik ∥ ≤ ∥ X̄ k −
Xik ∥ F . Therefore,

                                            1 N                     L∗ N
                                            N i∑                       ∑ ∥Xik − X̄ k ∥F .
                            ∇ f ( X̄ k )−         ∇ f i ( X k
                                                            i )   ≤
                                               =1               ∗   N i =1

Finally, Cauchy–Schwarz gives

                   1 N                        1 N                     1/2    1
                     ∑
                   N i =1
                          ∥ Xik − X̄ k ∥ F ≤ √   ∑
                                               N i =1
                                                      ∥ Xik − X̄ k ∥2F      = √ ∥X̃k ∥ F .
                                                                                N

Combining the last two displays yields (4.42).

Lemma 4.10 (Decomposing the tracking error ∥∇ f ( X̄ k )− Hik+1 ∥∗ ). Assume Assumptions 1–
3. Let (Xk ,Mk ,Hk ) be generated by (3.1) with initialization Hi0 = Mi0 for all i ∈ [ N ]. Define

                                  N                              N                             N
                     X̄ k := N1 ∑ Xik ,          M̄k := N1 ∑ Mik ,               H̄ k := N1 ∑ Hik ,
                                 i =1                           i =1                       i =1


                        X̃k := ( I − J )Xk ,          H̃k := ( I − J )Hk ,         J := N1 11⊤ .

Moreover, define the averaged true-gradient EMA (C̄ k )k≥0 and the drift variable ( D k )k≥0 as in
Lemma 4.8:

          C̄0 := ∇f(X0 ),         C̄ k+1 := βC̄ k +(1 − β)∇f(Xk ),                   D k := ∇f(Xk )− C̄ k+1 ,

where ∇f(Xk ) := N1 ∑iN=1 ∇ f i ( Xik ). Then for every k ≥ 0,

        1 N                             L∗
        N i∑
              ∥∇ f ( X̄ k )− Hik+1 ∥∗ ≤ √ ∥X̃k ∥ F +∥ D k ∥∗
           =1                            N
                                                                                                                (4.43)
                                                                              1 N
                                              +∥C̄   k +1
                                                            − M̄   k +1
                                                                          ∥∗ + ∑ ∥ Hik+1 − H̄ k+1 ∥∗ .
                                                                              N i =1

Furthermore, letting rmax := min{m,n}, we have the conversion bound
                                                                       r
                               1 N                                         rmax
                               N i∑
                                     ∥ Hik+1 − H̄ k+1 ∥∗ ≤                      ∥H̃k+1 ∥ F .                    (4.44)
                                  =1
                                                                            N

Also,
                                                            √
                              ∥C̄ k+1 − M̄k+1 ∥∗ ≤              rmax ∥C̄ k+1 − M̄k+1 ∥ F .                      (4.45)
ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-50                                                    23


Proof. Step 1: a four-term decomposition. Fix k ≥ 0 and an agent i ∈ [ N ]. Using
Lemma 4.5, we have H̄ k+1 = M̄k+1 . Therefore, by repeated addition/subtraction and the
triangle inequality,

∥∇ f ( X̄ k )− Hik+1 ∥∗ ≤ ∇ f ( X̄ k )−∇f(Xk )                + ∇f(Xk )− C̄ k+1
                                                          ∗                             ∗
                                 k +1          k +1              k +1
                          +∥C̄          − M̄          ∥∗ +∥ H̄          − Hik+1 ∥∗
                                      k
                       = ∇ f ( X̄ )−∇f(Xk )                   +∥ D k ∥∗ +∥C̄ k+1 − M̄k+1 ∥∗ +∥ Hik+1 − H̄ k+1 ∥∗ .
                                                          ∗

Averaging over i yields

            1 N
            N i∑
                  ∥∇ f ( X̄ k )− Hik+1 ∥∗ ≤ ∇ f ( X̄ k )−∇f(Xk ) +∥ D k ∥∗
               =1                                                ∗

                                                                                  1 N
                                                                                  N i∑
                                                  +∥C̄ k+1 − M̄k+1 ∥∗ +                 ∥ Hik+1 − H̄ k+1 ∥∗ .
                                                                                     =1

Step 2: bound the first term by disagreement of Xk . Apply Lemma 4.9 to obtain

                                                                       L∗
                                   ∇ f ( X̄ k )−∇f(Xk )              ≤ √ ∥X̃k ∥ F ,
                                                                   ∗    N

which proves (4.43).
Step 3: disagreement-to-average conversion for Hk+1 . For each i, by Cauchy–Schwarz
                           √
on singular values, ∥ A∥∗ ≤ rmax ∥ A∥ F . Therefore,
                                 √                                            r
   1 N                               rmax N                                       rmax  N                      1/2
   N i∑                              N i∑                                               ∑
         ∥ Hik+1 − H̄ k+1 ∥∗ ≤               ∥ Hik+1 − H̄ k+1 ∥ F ≤                        ∥ Hik+1 − H̄ k+1 ∥2F      .
      =1                                  =1
                                                                                   N i =1

Since H̃k+1 =( I − J )Hk+1 has i-th block Hik+1 − H̄ k+1 , ∥H̃k+1 ∥2F = ∑iN=1 ∥ Hik+1 − H̄ k+1 ∥2F , prov-
ing (4.44).
Step 4: nuclear-to-Frobenius conversion for the averaged EMA noise. The same in-
                √
equality ∥ A∥∗ ≤ rmax ∥ A∥ F yields (4.45).

Forcing Terms and Disagreement Bounds
Lemma 4.11 (A uniform bound on the stacked one-step motion). Assume Assumptions 1–
4 and that the iterates are generated by (3.1) with Yi0 = 0. Define the agentwise average X̄ k :=
1   N    k             1   ⊤               k               k
N ∑i =1 Xi , let J : = N 11 , and define X̃ : = ( I − J ) X . Then, for every k ≥ 0,
                                            √
                     ∥ X k +1 − X k ∥ F ≤        N ∥ X̄ k+1 − X̄ k ∥ F +∥X̃k+1 ∥ F +∥X̃k ∥ F .                    (4.46)
24                                  ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-50


                                                                                √
Consequently, using Lemma 4.2 and Lemma 4.1 (which imply ∥ X̄ k+1 − X̄ k ∥ F ≤ α rmax ), we have
                         √
       ∥Xk+1 − Xk ∥ F ≤ α Nrmax +∥X̃k+1 ∥ F +∥X̃k ∥ F ,  rmax := min{m,n}.                (4.47)
If, moreover, the assumptions and initialization of Lemma 4.7 hold with Uk+1 = msgn(Hk+1 ) (so
                                                 √
that ∥X̃t ∥ F ≤ v1 v2 γt ∥X̃0 ∥ F + 2αv1−
                                        1 v2 λ a
                                           γ       Nrmax for all t), then
                                    √                          4αv1 v2 λ a √
              sup ∥Xk+1 − Xk ∥ F ≤ α Nrmax + 2v1 v2 ∥X̃0 ∥ F +               Nrmax .               (4.48)
              k ≥0                                               1−γ

Proof. Step 1: decompose into average and disagreement parts. Write
                          Xk+1 − Xk = J (Xk+1 − Xk )+( I − J )(Xk+1 − Xk ).
Take Frobenius norms and use the triangle inequality:
                   ∥Xk+1 − Xk ∥ F ≤ ∥ J (Xk+1 − Xk )∥ F +∥( I − J )(Xk+1 − Xk )∥ F .
Because JZ has all blocks equal to Z̄ := N1 ∑i Zi , we have J (Xk+1 − Xk ) = col{ X̄ k+1 −
X̄ k ,..., X̄ k+1 − X̄ k } and hence
                                                       √
                                  ∥ J (Xk+1 − Xk )∥ F = N ∥ X̄ k+1 − X̄ k ∥ F .
Moreover, ( I − J )(Xk+1 − Xk ) = X̃k+1 − X̃k , so
                            ∥( I − J )(Xk+1 − Xk )∥ F ≤ ∥X̃k+1 ∥ F +∥X̃k ∥ F .
Combining the last three displays yields (4.46).
Step 2: bound the average motion in Frobenius norm. By Lemma 4.2, X̄ k+1 − X̄ k =
−αS̄k+1 , where S̄k+1 = N1 ∑iN=1 Sik+1 and Sik+1 = msgn( Hik+1 ). By Lemma 4.1(2), ∥Sik+1 ∥ F ≤
√                                                                            √
   rmax . By convexity of the Frobenius norm, ∥S̄k+1 ∥ F ≤ N1 ∑i ∥Sik+1 ∥ F ≤ rmax . Hence
                       √
∥ X̄ k+1 − X̄ k ∥ F ≤ α rmax . Substituting this into (4.46) yields (4.47).
Step 3: plug in the SUDA consensus bound.               √ Under Lemma        4.7 with Muon directions,
for any t ≥ 0, ∥X̃t ∥ F ≤ v1 v2 ∥X̃0 ∥ F + 2αv1−
                                               1 v2 λ a
                                                  γ      Nr max since γ t ≤ 1. Plugging this into (4.47)

and taking the supremum over k yields (4.48).

Lemma 4.12 (Bounding the gradient-difference forcing term). Assume Assumptions 2
and 3. Let Xk be any (possibly random) stacked iterates and let Gk = col{ G1k ,...,GN    k } be the

stochastic gradients with Gi = ∇ Fi ( Xi ;ξ i ). Define the stacked noise ∆i := Gi −∇ f i ( Xik ) and
                               k          k  k                                  k      k

∆k := col{∆1k ,...,∆kN }. Let J := N1 11⊤ and Z̃k := ( I − J )Zk . Then for any k ≥ 1,
                                                                    
                        E ∥G̃k − G̃k−1 ∥2F ≤ 2L2∗ E ∥Xk − Xk−1 ∥2F + 8Nσ2 .                    (4.49)

In particular, if Lemma 4.11 holds so that ∥Xt − Xt−1 ∥ F ≤ BX for all t ≥ 1, then
                                                 
                           sup E ∥G̃k − G̃k−1 ∥2F ≤ 2L2∗ BX  2
                                                               + 8Nσ2 .                            (4.50)
                             k ≥1
ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-50                                           25


Proof. Fix k ≥ 1. Decompose
                                                                   
                           Gk − Gk−1 = ∇f(Xk )−∇f(Xk−1 ) + ∆k − ∆k−1 ,

where ∇f(Xk ) := col{∇ f 1 ( X1k ),..., ∇ f N ( X N
                                                  k )}. Since I − J is an orthogonal projection,

∥Z̃∥ F ≤ ∥Z∥ F for all stacked Z. Therefore, using ∥U + V ∥2F ≤ 2∥U ∥2F + 2∥V ∥2F ,

                   ∥G̃k − G̃k−1 ∥2F = ∥( I − J )(Gk − Gk−1 )∥2F ≤ ∥Gk − Gk−1 ∥2F
                                     ≤ 2 ∥∇f(Xk )−∇f(Xk−1 )∥2F + 2 ∥∆k − ∆k−1 ∥2F .

Take expectations.
   For the first term, by Assumption 2, for each i we have

∥∇ f i ( Xik )−∇ f i ( Xik−1 )∥ F ≤ ∥∇ f i ( Xik )−∇ f i ( Xik−1 )∥∗ ≤ L∗ ∥ Xik − Xik−1 ∥ ≤ L∗ ∥ Xik − Xik−1 ∥ F .

Squaring and summing over i yields ∥∇f(Xk )−∇f(Xk−1 )∥2F ≤ L2∗ ∥Xk − Xk−1 ∥2F .
   For the second term, use ∥ A − B∥2F ≤ 2∥ A∥2F + 2∥ B∥2F blockwise:

                                       N                        N                N
                  ∥∆k − ∆k−1 ∥2F = ∑ ∥∆ik − ∆ik−1 ∥2F ≤ 2 ∑ ∥∆ik ∥2F + 2 ∑ ∥∆ik−1 ∥2F .
                                      i =1                     i =1             i =1

Taking expectations and using Assumption 3 (unconditional version of the conditional
variance bound) gives E∥∆it ∥2F ≤ σ2 for all i,t, and hence E∥∆k − ∆k−1 ∥2F ≤ 4Nσ2 .
   Combining the above bounds proves (4.49). Finally, if ∥Xk − Xk−1 ∥ F ≤ BX holds uni-
formly, then (4.50) follows immediately.

Lemma 4.13 (A bound on the EMA increment disagreement). Assume Assumption 3. Let
the iterates be generated by (3.1) with the EMA initialization M0 = G0 (as in Algorithm 1).
Let β ∈ [0,1). Define J := N1 11⊤ and Z̃k := ( I − J )Zk . For k ≥ 1 define the EMA increment
Vk := Mk − Mk−1 and its disagreement Ṽk := ( I − J )Vk . Then V1 = 0 and for all k ≥ 1,
                                                       
                     Ṽk+1 = β Ṽk +(1 − β) G̃k − G̃k−1 ,               G̃k := ( I − J )Gk .               (4.51)

Consequently, for any η > 0 and all k ≥ 1,

                 ∥Ṽk+1 ∥2F ≤ (1 + η ) β2 ∥Ṽk ∥2F +(1 + 1/η )(1 − β)2 ∥G̃k − G̃k−1 ∥2F .                  (4.52)

In particular, if there exists a constant BG such that supk≥1 E∥G̃k − G̃k−1 ∥2F ≤ BG
                                                                                   2 , then



                                                                      2(1 + β2 ) 2
                   sup E∥M̃k − M̃k−1 ∥2F = sup E∥Ṽk ∥2F ≤                            2
                                                                                B ≤ 2BG .                  (4.53)
                    k ≥1                         k ≥1                  (1 + β )2 G
26                                  ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-50


Proof. Step 1: derive the increment recursion. For k ≥ 1, subtract the EMA updates at
times k and k − 1:

                        Mk+1 − Mk = β(Mk − Mk−1 )+(1 − β)(Gk − Gk−1 ).

This is exactly Vk+1 = βVk +(1 − β)(Gk − Gk−1 ). Applying ( I − J ) to both sides gives (4.51).
Moreover, since M0 = G0 , we have M1 = βM0 +(1− β)G0 = M0 and hence V1 = M1 − M0 = 0.
Step 2: square and apply Young’s inequality. From (4.51) and ∥U + V ∥2F ≤ (1 + η )∥U ∥2F +
(1 + 1/η )∥V ∥2F , with U = βṼk and V = (1 − β)(G̃k − G̃k−1 ), we get (4.52).
Step 3: uniform bound under a uniform forcing bound.                               Assume supk≥1 E∥G̃k −
             2 . For β ∈ (0,1), pick η : =            1− β2                           1+ β2
G̃k−1 ∥2F ≤ BG                             2β2
                                               so that (1 + η ) β2 =                    2 = : q ∈ (0,1) and
           1+ β2
1 + 1/η = 1− β2 . Taking expectations in (4.52) gives, for all k ≥ 1,

                                                                         1 + β2 2
                            E∥Ṽk+1 ∥2F ≤ qE∥Ṽk ∥2F +(1 − β)2                 B .
                                                                         1 − β2 G

Unrolling this recursion and using Ṽ1 = 0 yields, for all k ≥ 1,

                                              1 + β 2 k −1 t 2               2 1+ β
                                                                                    2 1
                   E∥Ṽk+1 ∥2F ≤ (1 − β)2             ∑
                                              1 − β 2 t =0
                                                           q B G ≤ ( 1 − β )               B2 .
                                                                               1 − β2 1 − q G

                 1− β2
Since 1 − q =      2 , the last display becomes

                                         2(1 + β2 )(1 − β)2 2 2(1 + β2 ) 2
                         E∥Ṽk+1 ∥2F ≤                     BG =          B .
                                             (1 − β2 )2         (1 + β )2 G
Taking the supremum over k gives (4.53) for β ∈(0,1). For β = 0, V1 = 0 and (4.51) reduces
to Ṽk+1 = G̃k − G̃k−1 , hence supk≥1 E∥Ṽk ∥2F ≤ BG
                                                   2 ≤ 2B2 .
                                                         G

Lemma 4.14 (A uniform bound on the gradient-tracking           disagreement). Assume Assump-
tion 1(1) holds. Let Hk+1 = W Hk + Mk+1 − Mk as in (3.1). Let λ:= ρ(W − J )∈(0,1) and define
Z̃k := ( I − J )Zk . Assume that there exists a constant BM such that

                                      sup E∥M̃k+1 − M̃k ∥2F ≤ B2M .                                  (4.54)
                                       k ≥0

Then for all k ≥ 0,
                                        1 + λ 2  k +1                 2λ2 (1 + λ2 ) 2
                       E∥H̃k+1 ∥2F ≤                      E∥H̃0 ∥2F +                B .             (4.55)
                                              2                          (1 − λ2 )2 M
In particular,
                                                               2λ2 (1 + λ2 ) 2
                             sup E∥H̃k ∥2F ≤ E∥H̃0 ∥2F +                    B .                      (4.56)
                             k ≥0                               (1 − λ2 )2 M
ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-50                                     27


Proof. From Lemma 4.6, for any η > 0,

                      ∥H̃k+1 ∥2F ≤ (1 + η )λ2 ∥H̃k ∥2F +(1 + 1/η )λ2 ∥M̃k+1 − M̃k ∥2F .
                  2                    1+ λ       2                         2λ    1+ λ    2       2
Choose η := 12λ
             −λ                     2
                2 so that (1 + η ) λ =   2 = : q ∈ (0,1) and 1 + 1/η = 1 + 1−λ2 = 1−λ2 . Taking
expectations and using (4.54) yields

                                                                  1 + λ2 2
                                E∥H̃k+1 ∥2F ≤ qE∥H̃k ∥2F + λ2           B .
                                                                  1 − λ2 M

Unrolling this linear recursion gives

                                                                 1 + λ2 k t 2
                                                                 1 − λ2 t∑
                           E∥H̃k+1 ∥2F ≤ qk+1 E∥H̃0 ∥2F + λ2                q BM .
                                                                         =0

Since ∑kt=0 qt ≤ 1−1 q = 1−2λ2 , we get

                                              1 + λ2 2                                 2λ2 (1 + λ2 ) 2
      E∥H̃k+1 ∥2F ≤ qk+1 E∥H̃0 ∥2F + λ2                     B 2
                                                              M = q k +1
                                                                         E ∥ H̃ 0 2
                                                                                 ∥ F +              B ,
                                              1 − λ2 1 − λ2                             (1 − λ2 )2 M

which is (4.55). Taking the supremum over k yields (4.56).

Lemma 4.15 (An explicit bound on the EMA increment disagreement). Assume Assump-
tions 2 and 3. Let the iterates be generated by (3.1) with EMA parameter β ∈ [0,1) and initial-
ization M0 = G0 (as in Algorithm 1). Assume further that Lemma 4.11 holds so that there exists
BX > 0 with
                                 ∥ X k − X k −1 ∥ F ≤ BX , ∀k ≥ 1.                      (4.57)
Define
                                              2
                                             BG := 2L2∗ BX
                                                         2
                                                           + 8Nσ2 .                                   (4.58)
Then the forcing term in Lemma 4.6 admits the uniform bound

                                      sup E∥M̃k+1 − M̃k ∥2F ≤ 2BG
                                                                2
                                                                  .                                   (4.59)
                                      k ≥0


Proof. Lemma 4.12 and (4.57) imply supk≥1 E∥G̃k − G̃k−1 ∥2F ≤ BG
                                                               2 . Then Lemma 4.13 yields
           k    k − 1 2    2
supk≥1 E∥M̃ − M̃ ∥ F ≤ 2BG . Renaming the index (k 7→ k + 1) gives (4.59).

Proofs of the Main Convergence Results
Proposition 4.3 (A closed stationarity bound). Assume Assumptions 1–4. Let the iterates be
generated by (3.1) with initialization Hi0 = Mi0 = Gi0 and Yi0 = 0 for all i ∈[ N ]. Assume additionally
that Y0 =0 and the stability condition in Lemma 4.7 hold (so that the constants γ ∈(0,1), v1 ,v2 ≥1,
28                                ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-50


and λ a ≥ 0 in Lemma 4.7 exist). Let K ≥ 1. Define ∆0 := E[ f ( X̄ 0 )]− f inf and rmax := min{m,n}.
Then

        1 K −1                 ∆0 L ∗ α
        K k∑
              E ∥∇ f ( X̄ k )∥∗ ≤    +    + 2 Tcons (K )+ 2 Tdrift + 2 Tnoise (K )+ 2 Tgt ,      (4.60)
           =0
                                  αK   2

where

                          L ∗ K −1         L∗ v v2 ∥X̃0 ∥ F 2L∗ αv1 v2 λ a √
         Tcons (K ) := √ ∑ E∥X̃k ∥ F ≤ √1                  +                 rmax ,              (4.61)
                       K N k =0             K N 1−γ            1−γ
                                          "                                       #
                                 k   βL∗        4v1 v2 0      8αv1 v2 λ a √
             Tdrift := sup E∥ D ∥∗ ≤        α + √ ∥X̃ ∥ F +                  rmax ,              (4.62)
                       k ≥0          1− β          N             1−γ

                      1 K −1
                      K k∑
        Tnoise (K ) :=       E∥C̄ k+1 − M̄k+1 ∥∗
                          =0
                               "s                           #
                       √            1− β σ        σ      1
                     ≤ rmax              √ + √                ,                                  (4.63)
                                    1+ β N K N 1− β
                      r                          r       s
                         rmax                      r max               4λ2 (1 + λ2 ) 2
               Tgt :=         sup E∥H̃k+1 ∥ F ≤            E∥H̃0 ∥2F +              B ,          (4.64)
                          N k ≥0                     N                  (1 − λ2 )2 G

with λ := ρ(W − J ) ∈ (0,1) and

      2
                                          √                          4αv1 v2 λ a √
     BG := 2L2∗ BX
                 2
                   + 8Nσ2 ,        BX := α Nrmax + 2v1 v2 ∥X̃0 ∥ F +               Nrmax .       (4.65)
                                                                       1−γ

Proof. Start from Proposition 4.2:

              1 K −1                    ∆ 0 L ∗ α 2 K −1 h 1 N                           i
                ∑
              K k =0
                     E∥∇ f ( X̄ k )∥∗ ≤
                                        αK
                                           +
                                             2
                                                 + ∑E
                                                  K k =0     ∑
                                                           N i =1
                                                                  ∥∇ f ( X̄ k )− Hik+1 ∥∗ .

Apply Lemma 4.10 to the averaged tracking error inside the expectation and sum over k.
This yields the decomposition into four contributions.
    For the consensus term, apply Lemma 4.7 (with Muon directions) and sum the geo-
metric series to obtain (4.61).
    For the drift term, use the uniform bound from Lemma 4.8, giving (4.62).
    For the stochastic EMA term, use Lemma 4.4 and the nuclear-to-Frobenius conversion
(4.45) from Lemma 4.10; averaging βk+1 over k = 0,...,K − 1 yields (4.63).
    For the gradient-tracking disagreement
                                         q     term, use (4.44) from Lemma 4.10 and
Jensen/Cauchy–Schwarz: E∥H̃k+1 ∥ F ≤ E∥H̃k+1 ∥2F . Then apply Lemma 4.14 together
with Lemma 4.15. Finally, invoke Lemma 4.11 to bound BX as stated in (4.65). Collecting
terms yields (4.60).
ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-50                                                     29

                                                         p
Lemma 4.16 (Averaged tracking error bound with 1 − β noise scaling). Assume Assump-
tions 1–3. Let the iterates be generated by (3.1) with initialization Hi0 = Mi0 for all i ∈ [ N ]. Define
the network averages

                              1 N k                            1 N k                           1 N k
                              N i∑                             N i∑                            N i∑
                    X̄ k :=         Xi ,            H̄ k :=          Hi ,           M̄k :=           Mi .
                                 =1                               =1                              =1

Define the (average) tracking error
                                            k
                                           Egt := H̄ k −∇ f ( X̄ k ) ∈ Rm×n .

Let
                             1 N k                           1 N                         ¯ k := Ḡ k − ḡk .
                             N i∑                            N i∑
                   Ḡ k :=         Gi ,           ḡk :=           ∇ f i ( Xik ),        ∆
                                =1                              =1
Then for every integer K ≥ 1 we have
                                             q
         1 K −1                                  1− β σ                      L ∗ 1 K −1
         K k∑                                                              1 − β K k∑
                     k +1
                E ∥ Egt   ∥F ≤                       √
                                                 1+ β N                +         ·      E ∥ X̄ k+1 − X̄ k ∥ F
            =0                               |    {z     }√                         =0
                                                                           |            {z                  }
                                     stochastic noise ∼ √σ      1− β
                                                         N                             drift ∼ 1L−∗ αβ
                                                                                                                   (4.66)
                                      1 K −1                       1 K −1
                                     + ∑ E ∥ ḡk −∇ f ( X̄ k )∥ F + ∑ βk+1 E ∥ Egt
                                                                                0
                                                                                   ∥F .
                                      K k =0                       K k =0
                                      |         {z              }
                                                  consensus bias

Moreover, under Assumption 2, the consensus bias can be bounded by
                                         L∗
                ∥ ḡk −∇ f ( X̄ k )∥ F ≤ √ ∥X̃k ∥ F ,                      X̃k := ( I − J )Xk , J := N1 11⊤ .      (4.67)
                                          N
Proof. By Lemma 4.5, H̄ k = M̄k for all k ≥ 0. Averaging the EMA update gives

                                              M̄k+1 = β M̄k +(1 − β) Ḡ k .                                        (4.68)
                  k = M̄ k −∇ f ( X̄ k ) and (4.68),
Fix k ≥ 0. Using Egt
        k +1
       Egt   = M̄k+1 −∇ f ( X̄ k+1 ) = β M̄k +(1 − β) Ḡ k −∇ f ( X̄ k+1 )
                                                                                             
             = β( M̄k −∇ f ( X̄ k ))+ ∇ f ( X̄ k )−∇ f ( X̄ k+1 ) +(1 − β) Ḡ k −∇ f ( X̄ k )
                                                                                           
                  k
             = βEgt +(1 − β)∆¯ k +(1 − β)( ḡk −∇ f ( X̄ k )) + ∇ f ( X̄ k )−∇ f ( X̄ k+1 ) .                      (4.69)
                      | {z } |                   {z          } |            {z             }
                             noise                 consensus bias                                drift

                   k = Ak + Bk . Define A0 : = 0 and B0 : = E0 , and for k ≥ 0 define
Step 1: decompose Egt                                        gt
                                                                                                                    
                        ¯ k +( ḡk −∇ f ( X̄ k )) ,
   Ak+1 := βAk +(1 − β) ∆                                                   Bk+1 := βBk + ∇ f ( X̄ k )−∇ f ( X̄ k+1 ) .
30                                 ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-50


                     k = Ak + Bk for all k.
Then (4.69) implies Egt
Step 2: bound the stochastic part (noise). Unrolling the A-recursion and keeping only
the noise contribution yields
                                                              k
                                        k +1
                                       Anoise = (1 − β) ∑ βk−t ∆¯ t .
                                                             t =0

By Assumption 3, conditional on F t the noises are independent across agents and satisfy
   ¯ t | F t ] = 0 and E[∥∆
E[ ∆                       ¯ t ∥2 | F t ] ≤ σ2 /N. Therefore cross terms vanish, and
                                F
                                               v                             s
                   q                           u k                                            q
                                               u                 σ 2             1       σ      1− β σ
       k +1
E∥ Anoise                k +1 2
              ∥ F ≤ E∥ Anoise   ∥ F ≤ (1 − β ) t ∑ β 2( k − t ) · ≤ (1 − β )        2
                                                                                      · √   =   1+ β
                                                                                                     √ .
                                                 t =0            N             1− β       N           N

Step 3: bound the drift part. Unrolling Bk+1 = βBk + dk with dk := ∇ f ( X̄ k )−∇ f ( X̄ k+1 )
gives
                                                                  k
                                      B k +1 = β k +1 B 0 + ∑ β k − t d t .
                                                              t =0
Thus, by triangle inequality,
                                                                       k
                           E ∥ B k +1 ∥ F ≤ β k +1 E ∥ B 0 ∥ F + ∑ β k − t E ∥ d t ∥ F .
                                                                      t =0

Now average over k = 0,...,K − 1 and exchange the order of summation:

             1 K −1 k k − t               1 K −1            K −1
                                                                           1     1 K −1
             K k∑  ∑    β   E ∥ d t
                                    ∥ F =
                                          K ∑    E ∥ d t
                                                         ∥ F ∑   β k−t
                                                                       ≤
                                                                         1 − β
                                                                               ·
                                                                                 K ∑ E∥ d t ∥ F .
                =0 t =0                     t =0             k=t                   t =0

Therefore,
                  1 K −1                 1 K −1                    1   1 K −1
                    ∑
                  K k =0
                         E ∥ B k +1 ∥ F ≤ ∑ β k +1 E ∥ B 0 ∥ F +
                                         K k =0
                                                                      · ∑ E∥ d t ∥ F .
                                                                 1 − β K t =0
Under Assumption 2, ∥dt ∥ F ≤ ∥dt ∥∗ ≤ L∗ ∥ X̄ t+1 − X̄ t ∥, and ∥·∥ ≤ ∥·∥ F . This yields the drift
term in (4.66).
Step 4: bound the consensus bias. The consensus-bias contribution in Ak+1 is
                                               k                       
                                k +1
                               Abias = (1 − β) ∑ βk−t ḡt −∇ f ( X̄ t ) .
                                                   t =0

By triangle inequality,
                                                      k
                              k +1
                          E∥ Abias ∥ F ≤ (1 − β) ∑ βk−t E∥ ḡt −∇ f ( X̄ t )∥ F .
                                                     t =0
ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-50                                          31


Now average over k = 0,...,K − 1 and exchange summations:

   1 K −1               1 K −1                             K −1
                                                                    1 K −1
     ∑
   K k =0
              k +1
          E∥ Abias ∥ F ≤ ∑ E∥ ḡt −∇ f ( X̄ t )∥ F ·(1 − β) ∑ βk−t ≤ ∑ E∥ ḡt −∇ f ( X̄ t )∥ F ,
                        K t =0                                      K t =0
                                                            k=t

where we used (1 − β) ∑∞    s
                       s=0 β = 1. This yields the bias term in (4.66).
                                    k +1
   Combining Steps 2–4 and using Egt     = Ak+1 + Bk+1 proves (4.66). Finally, (4.67) follows
from the same argument as Lemma 4.9:

                              1 N                                     1 N                      L∗
   ∥ ḡk −∇ f ( X̄ k )∥ F =     ∑
                              N i =1
                                     ∇ f i ( Xik )−∇ f i ( X̄ k )
                                                                    F
                                                                      ≤ ∑ L∗ ∥ Xik − X̄ k ∥ F ≤ √ ∥X̃k ∥ F .
                                                                       N i =1                    N


Lemma 4.17 (Gradient-tracking disagreement bound (no heterogeneity term)). Assume
Assumptions 1(1), 2, and 3. Let (Xk ,Mk ,Hk ) be generated by (3.1). Define the disagreement
operator Z̃ := ( I − J )Z with J := N1 11⊤ . Let λ := ρ(W − J ) ∈ (0,1). Then, for every integer K ≥ 1,

          1 K −1                    λ                     λ 1 K −1
            ∑
          K k =0
                 E ∥H̃k+1 ∥ F ≤
                                K (1 − λ )
                                           E ∥H̃0 ∥ F +
                                                        1 − λ K k∑
                                                             ·      E ∥M̃k+1 − M̃k ∥ F .                (4.70)
                                                                 =0

Moreover, with rmax := min{m,n},

       1 K −1                         ff(X0 )− M̃0 ∥ F
                                   E ∥∇                             √
         ∑
       K k =0
              E ∥M̃k+1 − M̃k ∥ F ≤
                                          K
                                                       + 2(1 − β ) σ N
                                                                                    !                   (4.71)
                                                 √          2 K −1        1
                                       + L∗ α        Nrmax + ∑ E ∥X̃ ∥ F + E ∥X̃ ∥ F .
                                                                    k           K
                                                            K k =0        K

Combining (4.70)–(4.71) yields
                                                           "
         1 K −1                    λ                     λ      ff(X0 )− M̃0 ∥ F
                                                             E ∥∇
           ∑
         K k =0
                E ∥H̃k+1 ∥ F ≤
                               K (1 − λ )
                                          E ∥H̃0 ∥ F +
                                                       1−λ          K
                                                                !                #                      (4.72)
                      √            2 K −1              1                      √
              + L∗ α Nrmax + ∑ E ∥X̃k ∥ F + E ∥X̃K ∥ F + 2(1 − β) σ N .
                                   K k =0              K

In particular, if Lemma 4.7 holds with Muon directions, then
                                                           "
    1 K −1                       λ                      λ       ff(X0 )− M̃0 ∥ F
                                                             E ∥∇                      √
      ∑
    K k =0
           E ∥ H̃ k +1
                       ∥ F ≤
                             K (1 − λ )
                                        E ∥ H̃ 0
                                                 ∥ F +
                                                       1−λ          K
                                                                                 + L∗ α Nrmax

           2L∗ v1 v2 (1 +∥ B2 ∥) 0        L∗ v1 v2 (1 +∥ B2 ∥) K 0        2L∗ αv1 v2 λ a √
         +                      ∥X̃ ∥ F +                     γ ∥X̃ ∥ F +                  Nrmax
                K (1 − γ )                          K                      (1 − γ ) K
                                                     #                                        (4.73)
           4L∗ αv1 v2 λ a √                     √
         +                  Nrmax + 2(1 − β) σ N .
              1−γ
32                                   ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-50


Proof. Step 1: unroll the GT disagreement recursion. From Lemma 4.6 (non-squared
form),
             ∥H̃k+1 ∥ F ≤ λ ∥H̃k +(M̃k+1 − M̃k )∥ F ≤ λ ∥H̃k ∥ F + λ ∥M̃k+1 − M̃k ∥ F .
Unrolling this scalar recursion and summing the resulting geometric series yields (4.70).
Step 2: bound the average EMA increment without a heterogeneity term. Define the
local EMA tracking error

                      Ek := ∇f(Xk )− Mk ,            Ẽk := ( I − J )Ek = ∇
                                                                          ff(Xk )− M̃k .

From the EMA update Mk+1 = βMk +(1 − β)Gk and the decomposition Gk = ∇f(Xk )+ ∆k ,
we have
                                                                      
Ek+1 =∇f(Xk+1 )− βMk −(1− β)∇f(Xk )−(1− β)∆k = βEk + ∇f(Xk+1 )−∇f(Xk ) −(1− β)∆k .

Applying ( I − J ) and using its non-expansiveness yields the recursion

                   ∥Ẽk+1 ∥ F ≤ β ∥Ẽk ∥ F +∥∇
                                             ff(Xk+1 )− ∇                   ˜ k ∥F .
                                                        ff(Xk )∥ F +(1 − β)∥∆                                (4.74)

Unrolling (4.74) and averaging over k = 0,...,K − 1 gives

     1 K −1                E ∥Ẽ0 ∥ F         1      K −1
                                                                                               1 K −1
     K k∑
            E ∥ Ẽ k
                     ∥ F ≤
                           K ( 1 − β )
                                       +
                                         K ( 1 − β ) ∑    E ∥ f
                                                              ∇ f ( X k +1
                                                                           )− f
                                                                              ∇ f ( X k
                                                                                        )∥ F +
                                                                                               K ∑ E ∥ ˜∆k ∥F ,
        =0                                           k =0                                        k =0

where we used the weight identity (1 − β) ∑∞            s
                                                s=0 β = 1.
   Next, since each f i is L∗ -smooth in the sense of Assumption 2, we have for each i
and any X,Y that ∥∇ f i ( X )−∇ f i (Y )∥ F ≤ ∥∇ f i ( X )−∇ f i (Y )∥∗ ≤ L∗ ∥ X − Y ∥ ≤ L∗ ∥ X − Y ∥ F .
Stacking and using non-expansiveness of ( I − J ) yields

                      ff(Xk+1 )− ∇
                     ∥∇           ff(Xk )∥ F ≤ L∗ ∥Xk+1 − Xk ∥ F .
                                                                √
                                         ˜ k ∥ F ≤ E ∥∆k ∥ F ≤ σ N. Therefore,
Moreover, by Assumption 3 and Jensen, E ∥∆

                 1 K −1              E ∥Ẽ0 ∥ F   L ∗ 1 K −1                  √
                   ∑
                 K k =0
                        E ∥Ẽk ∥ F ≤            +     · ∑ E ∥Xk+1 − Xk ∥ F + σ N.
                                     K ( 1 − β ) 1 − β K k =0
                                                                                                             (4.75)

                                                                      
                                                              ˜ k + Ẽk . Thus, using triangle
   Finally, note that M̃k+1 − M̃k =(1 − β) G̃k − M̃k =(1 − β) ∆
inequality and (4.75),

            1 K −1                              1 K −1                     K −1
                                                       ˜ k ∥ F +(1 − β)· 1 ∑ E ∥Ẽk ∥ F
              ∑
            K k =0
                   E ∥M̃k+1 − M̃k ∥ F ≤ (1 − β)· ∑ E ∥∆
                                                K k =0                   K k =0

                          √    E ∥Ẽ0 ∥ F       1 K −1                       √
              ≤ (1 − β ) σ N +            + L∗ · ∑ E ∥Xk+1 − Xk ∥ F +(1 − β)σ N.
                                  K             K k =0
ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-50                             33


It remains to bound the average primal increment. Write Xk = X̄k + X̃k with X̄k := JXk . Then


                            ∥Xk+1 − Xk ∥ F ≤ ∥X̄k+1 − X̄k ∥ F +∥X̃k+1 − X̃k ∥ F .

Since X̄k√is a stacked consensus variable with all blocks equal to X̄ k , we have ∥X̄k+1 −
                                                                       √
X̄k ∥ F = N ∥ X̄ k+1 − X̄ k ∥ F . By Lemma 4.2, ∥ X̄ k+1 − X̄ k ∥ F ≤ α rmax . Moreover, ∥X̃k+1 −
X̃k ∥ F ≤ ∥X̃k+1 ∥ F +∥X̃k ∥ F . Averaging over k = 0,...,K − 1 yields


                1 K −1                     √       2 K −1         1
                  ∑
                K k =0
                       E ∥Xk+1 − Xk ∥ F ≤ α Nrmax + ∑ E ∥X̃k ∥ F + E ∥X̃K ∥ F .
                                                   K k =0         K


Substituting into the previous display gives (4.71).

Step 3: plug into the GT bound and (optionally) use Lemma 4.7. Combining Step 1 and
Step 2 yields (4.72). If Lemma 4.7 holds with Muon directions, then ∥X̃k ∥ F ≤ v1 v2 γk (1 +
                               √
∥ B2 ∥)∥X̃0 ∥ F + 2αv1−
                      1 v2 λ a
                         γ       Nrmax . Averaging and using K1 ∑kK=−01 γk ≤ K(11−γ) gives


                   1 K −1              v1 v2 (1 +∥ B2 ∥) 0        2αv1 v2 λ a √
                     ∑
                   K k =0
                          E ∥X̃k ∥ F ≤
                                           K (1 − γ )
                                                        ∥X̃ ∥ F +
                                                                    1−γ
                                                                                Nrmax ,


which implies (4.73).



Proposition 4.4 (Transient complexity with explicit (fast) network-dependent decay). As-
sume Assumptions 1–4. Let the iterates be generated by (3.1) with initialization Y0 = 0, M0 = G0 ,
and H0 = M0 as in Algorithm 1. Assume also the stability condition in Lemma 4.7 so that its
constants (γ,v1 ,v2 ,λ a ) exist. Fix a horizon K ≥ 1 and choose

                    α0                   b0
            α :=        ,       1 − β := √ ,        with fixed constants α0 > 0, b0 ∈ (0,1].
                   K3/4                   K

Let rmax := min{m,n} and ∆0 := E[ f ( X̄ 0 )]− f inf . Let λ := ρ(W − J ) ∈ (0,1). Define the average
tracking error


                                                            1 N k                  1 N k
                                                            N i∑                   N i∑
                     k
                    Egt := H̄ k −∇ f ( X̄ k ),    H̄ k :=         Hi ,   X̄ k :=         Xi .
                                                               =1                     =1
34                                            ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-50


Then
                                              √                        !
       1 K −1                            ∆0 2σ rmax p      2L∗ α0 rmax
              E ∥∇ f ( X̄ k )∥∗ ≤                                        K −1/4
       K k∑
                                            + √       b0 +
          =0
                                         α0     N              b0
                                       |               {z                     }
                                                          topology-free leading term
                                                                                       !
           5          4L∗ α0 v1 v2 λ a         2λ               8λ L∗ α0 v1 v2 λ a
       +     L ∗ α0 +                  rmax +     L∗ α0 rmax +                     rmax K −3/4
           2              1−γ                 1−λ              1−λ     1−γ
         |                                         {z                                        }
                                                network-dependent drift terms (no σ)
                √                           !
           2 rmax     0         4λ     √
       +          E∥ Egt ∥ F +     b0 σ rmax K −1/2
             b0                1−λ
         |                     {z                 }
                            higher-order stochastic terms                                                               (4.76)
               2L∗ v1 v2 (1 +∥ B2 ∥) √                           4λ    L∗ v1 v2 (1 +∥ B2 ∥) √
       +                     √                rmax ∥X̃0 ∥ F +        √        rmax ∥X̃0 ∥ F
                    (1 − γ ) N                                  1−λ
                                                             (1 − γ ) N
                                                                 r
                  2λ L∗ v1 v2 (1 +∥ B2 ∥) √         0       2λ      rmax    ff(X0 )− M̃0 ∥ F
               +             √              rmax ∥X̃ ∥ F +               E∥ ∇
                 1−λ            N                          1 − λ     N
                     r                 !
                  2λ   rmax        0
               +              E∥H̃ ∥ F       K −1
                                             |{z}
                 1−λ     N
                                                   init. transients
             4λ L∗ α0 v1 v2 λ a
       +                        rmax K −7/4 .
           1−λ      1−γ
           |             {z               }
                    fast transient from α/K


In particular,
                                                    1 K −1
                                                lim
                                               K →∞ K
                                                      ∑ E ∥∇ f (X̄ k )∥∗ = 0.
                                                      k =0



Proof. Step 1: start from the telescoping descent inequality. Proposition 4.2 gives

           1 K −1                     ∆ 0 L ∗ α 2 K −1 h 1 N                           i
             ∑
           K k =0
                  E ∥∇ f ( X̄ k )∥∗ ≤
                                      αK
                                         +
                                           2
                                               + ∑E
                                                K k =0     ∑
                                                         N i =1
                                                                ∥∇ f ( X̄ k )− Hik+1 ∥∗ .                               (4.77)



Step 2: reduce the tracking mismatch to averaged GT error and GT disagreement. For
each k,

               h1 N                                   i                                        r
                                                                      √                            rmax
                N i∑
           E            ∥∇ f ( X̄ )− Hik+1 ∥∗
                                   k
                                                          ≤ L∗ α +                 k +1
                                                                          rmax E∥ Egt   ∥F +            E∥H̃k+1 ∥ F .
                   =1
                                                                                                    N
ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-50                             35


Averaging over k = 0,...,K − 1 and substituting into (4.77) yields

                 1 K −1                     ∆0 5         √      1 K −1
                   ∑
                 K k =0
                        E ∥∇ f ( X̄ k )∥∗ ≤    + L∗ α + 2 rmax · ∑ E∥ Egt
                                            αK 2                K k =0
                                                                          k +1
                                                                               ∥F
                                               r                                               (4.78)
                                                 rmax 1 K−1
                                                  N K k∑
                                            +2       ·      E∥H̃k+1 ∥ F .
                                                         =0


Step 3: bound the averaged GT error and the averaged GT disagreement. Lemma 4.16
gives
                                     q
              1 K −1                     1− β σ    L∗ 1       K −1

              K k∑                                            ∑ E∥X̄ k+1 − X̄ k ∥F
                         k +1
                     E∥ Egt   ∥F ≤       1+ β N + 1 − β · K
                                             √
                 =0                                           k =0
                                           K −1
                                         1                               1 K −1
                                     +     ∑
                                         K k =0
                                                E∥ ḡk −∇ f ( X̄ k )∥ F + ∑ βk+1 E∥ Egt
                                                                         K k =0
                                                                                     0
                                                                                        ∥F .   (4.79)

                                     √
By Lemma 4.2, ∥ X̄ k+1 − X̄ k ∥ F ≤ α rmax . Moreover, by (4.67) and Lemma 4.7 (Muon case),

                         1 K −1                           L ∗ 1 K −1
                           ∑
                         K k =0
                                E∥ ḡk −∇ f ( X̄ k )∥ F ≤ √ · ∑ E∥X̃k ∥ F .
                                                           N K k =0

By Lemma 4.7 with Muon directions (using (4.32)), for every k ≥ 0,

                                                                 2αv1 v2 λ a √
                     ∥X̃k ∥ F ≤ v1 v2 γk (1 +∥ B2 ∥)∥X̃0 ∥ F +                 Nrmax ,
                                                                   1−γ

and hence, averaging over k = 0,...,K − 1 and using K1 ∑kK=−01 γk ≤ K(11−γ) ,

                  1 K −1             v1 v2 (1 +∥ B2 ∥) 0        2αv1 v2 λ a √
                    ∑
                  K k =0
                         E∥X̃k ∥ F ≤
                                         (1 − γ ) K
                                                      ∥X̃ ∥ F +
                                                                  1−γ
                                                                              Nrmax .


In particular, the primal disagreement is of order O(α) up to an exponentially decay-
ing/initial transient, and this bound is independent of the gradient noise level σ thanks to
the uniform boundedness of Muon directions.
    For the GT disagreement, Lemma 4.17 yields (4.72). In this bound, the stochastic-
noise contribution enters multiplied by (1 − β) (via the EMA increment), giving a term of
the form
                                     λ             √
                                          (1 − β) σ N,
                                    1−λ
which becomes a higher-order term of order (1 − β)σ = O(K −1/2 ) under 1 − β = b0 K −1/2 .
The remaining deterministic contribution in (4.72) is controlled by smoothness through
the primal increments and the primal disagreement; under Muon, these increments
36                               ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-50


are O(α). Moreover, Lemma 4.17 contains an additional boundary term of the form
L∗      K                                                     K
 K E∥ X̃ ∥ F . Using Lemma 4.7 (Muon case) at time k = K and γ ≤ 1 yields

                    1             v1 v2 (1 +∥ B2 ∥) 0        2αv1 v2 λ a √
                      E∥X̃K ∥ F ≤                  ∥X̃ ∥ F +               Nrmax .
                    K                     K                  (1 − γ ) K

The first term contributes an additional K −1 initial transient, while the second contributes
a faster term of order α/K. Substituting the GT disagreement bound (4.72) (together
with the averaged primal-disagreement bound above) into (4.78) yields the claimed K-
dependent decomposition.
Step 4: substitute α = α0 K −3/4 and 1 − β = b0 K −1/2 . Collect powers of K using
                ∆0 ∆0 −1/4               p                p                        α   α0
                  = K      ,                 1− β =           b0 K −1/4 ,             = K −1/4 ,
                αK α0                                                            1 − β b0

             1 K −1 k +1       1     1                                                    α
               ∑
             K k =0
                    β    ≤          = K −1/2 ,
                           K (1 − β) b0
                                                                 α = α0 K −3/4 ,
                                                                                          K
                                                                                            = α0 K −7/4 ,

                                                                    1
                                  1 − β = b0 K −1/2 ,                 = K −1 .
                                                                    K
This yields (4.76).

Corollary 4.1 (Big-O form of the SUDA–Muon convergence rate). Under the assumptions
of Proposition 4.4 and with the same stepsize and EMA choices α = α0 K −3/4 and 1 − β = b0 K −1/2 ,
there exists a constant C > 0 (independent of K, N, λ, γ, and σ) such that for all integers K ≥ 1,

  1 K −1                                                                K −3/4
    ∑
  K k =0
         E ∥∇ f ( X̄ k )∥∗ ≤ C         1 + √σ K −1/4 +
                                             N                          (1 − γ)(1 − λ)
                                     |       {z    }                    |     {z     }
                                 dominant topology-free term        network-dependent drift terms
                                                σ  −1/2                                  K −1
                                 +           1+      K                      +       √
                                                1−λ                                   N (1 − γ)(1 − λ)                (4.80)
                                           |      {z    }                           |       {z       }
                                     higher-order stochastic network term       network-dependent initial transient
                                                          !
                                         K −7/4
                                 +                  .
                                     (1 − γ)(1 − λ)
                                     |     {z     }
                                         fast transient

Equivalently,

     1 K −1                                        −3/4
       ∑
     K k =0
            E ∥∇ f ( X̄ k )∥∗ = O 1 + √σ K −1/4 + (1−Kγ)(1−λ)
                                        N
                                                                                                                     
                                                                                         K −1            −7/4
                                            + 1 + 1−σ λ K −1/2 + √                   N (1−γ)(1−λ)
                                                                                                  + (1−Kγ)(1−λ)            .
ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-50                       37


Proof. Starting from the refined bound (4.76) in Proposition 4.4, note that it decomposes
into five groups of terms with powers K −1/4 , K −3/4 , K −1/2 , K −1 , and K −7/4 . We upper-
bound each coefficient by a universal constant times the desired (K, N,1 − λ,1 − γ,σ)-
dependent factor.

1. K −1/4 term. The coefficient of K −1/4 in (4.76) is
                                      √
                                 ∆0 2σ rmax p      2L∗ α0 rmax
                                    + √       b0 +             ,
                                 α0     N              b0
                                                                                     √
which is bounded by a constant depending only on (∆0 ,L∗ ,rmax ,α0 ,b0 ) times 1 + σ/ N.
This yields the first term in (4.80).

2. K −3/4 term. The K −3/4 coefficient in (4.76) contains only deterministic drift terms and
depends on γ and λ via expressions of the form 1/(1 − γ) and λ/(1 − λ). Using 0 < γ < 1
and 0 < λ < 1, we have 1 ≤ 1/(1 − γ) and λ/(1 − λ) ≤   1/(1 − λ), so the entire coefficient is
bounded by a constant multiple of 1/ (1− γ)(1− λ) . This gives the second term in (4.80).

3. K −1/2 term. The K −1/2 group in (4.76) consists of
                                 √
                                2 rmax     0        4λ     √
                                       E∥ Egt ∥F +     b0 σ rmax ,
                                  b0               1−λ

which we bound by a constant (independent of K, N, λ, γ, σ) plus a constant multiple of
σ/(1 − λ). Absorbing the purely deterministic part into C yields the third term in (4.80).

4. K −1 term.      −1
         √ The K group in (4.76) collects initial transients. Factoring out the explicit
√
   rmax / N and using again 1 ≤ 1/(1 − γ) and√λ/(1 − λ) ≤ 1/(1 − λ), the whole coeffi-
                                                              
cient is bounded by a constant multiple of 1/ N (1 − γ)(1 − λ) , giving the fourth term
in (4.80).

5. K −7/4 term. The last group in (4.76) is already of the form const · λ/ (1 − λ)(1 −
                                                                                       
γ) K −7/4 . Using λ ≤ 1, we upper-bound this by a constant times K −7/4 / (1 − γ)(1 − λ) ,
which yields the fifth term in (4.80).
     Combining these five estimates and enlarging C if necessary, we obtain (4.80). The
equivalent big-O expression follows immediately.


    With the master bound established, we now draw two structural consequences. We
first instantiate it for concrete SUDA communication backbones in Subsection 4.4 and
then show in Subsection 4.5 that tracking before polarization is not a modular detail but
a structural requirement. Section 5 then turns to a complementary counterexample on
federated versus fully decentralized linear speedup.
38                             ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-50


4.4    Specialization to Concrete SUDA Backbones

To compare concrete communication backbones, it suffices to inspect how Corollary 4.1
depends on the SUDA contraction rate γ. For convenience, we recall the big-O master
bound:

          1 K −1                                         K −3/4
            ∑
          K k =0
                 E ∥∇ f ( X̄ k )∥∗ ≤ C 1 + √σ K −1/4 +
                                             N           (1 − γ)(1 − λ)
                                               σ  −1/2            K −1
                                       + 1+          K      +√                                (4.81)
                                              1−λ              N (1 − γ)(1 − λ)
                                                        !
                                             K −7/4
                                       +                  ,
                                         (1 − γ)(1 − λ)

    The dominant term is the same for every SUDA instantiation and is completely in-
dependent of the graph. Different communication backbones appear only through the
factor (1 − γ)−1 in the lower-order network corrections, where γ is the SUDA contraction
rate.
    For the SUDA instantiations of theoretical interest here, the substitution is simple:

                  γ = λ2   for ED/D2 and EXTRA,           γ=λ      for ATC-GT.

      Therefore
                                                             
                                      1                 1
                                               =O
                                (1 − γ)(1 − λ)      (1 − λ )2

in all three cases. At the big-O level, ED/D2 , EXTRA, and ATC-GT therefore all scale as
O((1 − λ)−2 ) in the K −3/4 , K −1 , and K −7/4 network-dependent corrections.
    The difference lies in constants rather than order. ED/D2 and EXTRA use 1 − γ = (1 −
λ)(1 + λ), whereas ATC-GT uses 1 − γ = 1 − λ. When λ is close to one, ATC-GT therefore
carries a larger prefactor in the subdominant network terms, even though the asymptotic
order is the same. This is precisely the modularity provided by the SUDA formulation:
among convergent SUDA instantiations, the leading stochastic term is graph-free, and
the communication backbone changes only the transient network corrections through
the substitution for γ.
    In short, the theory does not predict different dominant rates for ED/D2 , EXTRA,
and ATC-GT. It predicts the same leading order and different transient behavior. This
modularity, however, has a clear limit: changing the backbone within SUDA affects only
transient terms, but changing the order between tracking and polarization does not. The
next subsection shows that moving tracking after polarization can destroy convergence
altogether.
ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-50                             39


4.5   Why Tracking Must Precede Polarization
The previous subsection treated the communication backbone as a modular choice inside
the SUDA template. We now turn to a different design choice that is not modular in
this sense: whether Muon polarizes a tracked quantity or a purely local one. A key
design choice in SUDA–Muon is that the Muon direction is computed from a network-
aggregated / tracked quantity Hik+1 rather than directly from a local stochastic gradient
(or its EMA). The following proposition shows that if we remove this pre-polarization
tracking step while keeping the rest of the algorithm unchanged, then one cannot, in
general, guarantee exact convergence to stationarity for heterogeneous objectives. For
clarity we present the obstruction in the deterministic/noiseless subcase σ = 0; this is not
an additional assumption, since the stochastic-oracle model in Assumption 3 explicitly
allows σ = 0 (deterministic gradients), and any convergence guarantee under that model
must hold in particular for this simplest admissible case. In this setting, we construct
smooth and lower-bounded problems on which the averaged iterate X̄ k gets stuck at a
non-stationary point.

Proposition 4.5 (A non-stationary fixed point for the no-tracking variant (general matrix
case)). For notational simplicity, consider the deterministic/noiseless setting σ = 0 and the general
matrix case m,n ≥ 1. Define the no-tracking variant of SUDA–Muon by keeping Algorithm 1
unchanged except that the gradient-tracking update is removed and replaced by

                              Hik+1 ← Mik+1         for all i ∈ [ N ], k ≥ 0.                 (4.82)

Assume the communication/SUDA matrices satisfy Assumption 1, and initialize as in Algo-
rithm 1 with Yi0 = 0 and Mi0 = Gi0 .
    Then there exist N = 2 and local objectives f 1 , f 2 : Rm×n → R that are L∗ -smooth in the sense
of Assumption 2 and are lower bounded, such that for the consensus initialization X10 = X20 = X † ,
the averaged iterate satisfies
                                        X̄ k ≡ X † for all k ≥ 0,
                                                            
while the global objective f ( X ) ≜ 12 f 1 ( X )+ f 2 ( X ) has

                                            ∇ f ( X † ) ̸= 0.

Consequently,
                               1 K −1
                               K k∑
                                      ∇ f ( X̄ k ) ∗ ≡ ∇ f ( X † ) ∗ > 0,
                                  =0

and hence the no-tracking variant (4.82) cannot guarantee exact stationarity convergence (van-
ishing averaged gradient nuclear norm at X̄ k ) over the class of smooth heterogeneous objectives.

Proof. We first note that the averaging argument in the proof of Lemma 4.2 uses only the
X- and Y-updates (and the doubly-stochasticity/polynomial properties of A,B,C), and
40                                  ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-50


does not rely on the specific recursion defining Hk+1 . Hence the same argument applies
to the no-tracking variant as well and yields

                                                         1 2 k +1
                                                         2 i∑
               X̄ k+1 = X̄ k − α S̄k+1 ,       S̄k+1 ≜         Si ,    Sik+1 = msgn( Hik+1 ).      (4.83)
                                                            =1

Under the no-tracking rule (4.82), we have Hik+1 = Mik+1 . It remains to exhibit a smooth
lower-bounded instance for which S̄k+1 ≡ 0 while ∇ f ( X̄ 0 ) ̸= 0.
Construction of the counterexample. Choose f 1 , f 2 as in Example 4.1 below and initialize
at consensus X̄ 0 = X † . For these functions, for every X ∈ Rm×n , the gradients satisfy

                            ∇ f 1 ( X ) = c1 ( X ) U,       ∇ f 2 ( X ) = c2 ( X ) U,              (4.84)

where U ∈ Rm×n is a fixed rank-one matrix and the scalar coefficients obey c1 ( X ) > 0 and
c2 ( X ) < 0. In particular, writing U = uv⊤ with ∥u∥2 = ∥v∥2 = 1, for any scalar µ ̸= 0 we
have msgn(µU ) = sign(µ) U because a reduced SVD of µU is µU = u(|µ|)(sign(µ)v)⊤ .
Therefore, msgn(∇ f 1 ( X )) = U and msgn(∇ f 2 ( X )) = −U for all X.
Inductive cancellation argument. In the noiseless setting, Gik = ∇ f i ( Xik ). Since Mi0 = Gi0
and Mik+1 = βMik +(1 − β) Gik , the alignment (4.84) implies inductively that M1k = µ1k U and
M2k = µ2k U for scalars µ1k > 0 and µ2k < 0 for all k. Therefore, under (4.82), we have S1k+1 =
msgn( M1k+1 ) = U and S2k+1 = msgn( M2k+1 ) = −U, and hence S̄k+1 = (U − U )/2 = 0 for all
k ≥ 0. Plugging S̄k+1 = 0 into (4.83) yields X̄ k+1 = X̄ k for all k, so X̄ k ≡ X̄ 0 = X † . Finally,
Example 4.1 satisfies ∇ f ( X † ) ̸= 0, so the averaged stationarity measure stays bounded
away from zero.

Example 4.1 (A concrete smooth counterexample in the general matrix setting). Let N = 2.
Pick any unit vectors u ∈ Rm and v ∈ Rn with ∥u∥2 = ∥v∥2 = 1 and define the rank-one
matrix
                                      U ≜ uv⊤ .
Let a > b > 0 be constants and define, for X ∈ Rm×n ,
                                                                                
                   f 1 ( X ) ≜ a log 1 + e⟨U,X ⟩ , f 2 ( X ) ≜ b log 1 + e−⟨U,X ⟩ ,

where ⟨U,X ⟩ ≜ trace(U ⊤ X ). Then f 1 and f 2 are lower bounded (both are nonnegative)
and differentiable with
                                           1                                        1
                    ∇ f1 (X) = a                  U,        ∇ f 2 ( X ) = −b               U.
                                   1 + e−⟨U,X ⟩                                1 + e⟨U,X ⟩
In particular, ∇ f 1 ( X ) and ∇ f 2 ( X ) are always aligned with U but have opposite signs in
their scalar coefficients; hence msgn(∇ f 1 ( X )) = uv⊤ and msgn(∇ f 2 ( X )) = −uv⊤ for all
X.
ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-50                            41


    Moreover, the gradients are Lipschitz in the sense of Assumption 2. Indeed, let φ(t)≜
(1 + e−t )−1 so that φ′ (t)= φ(t)(1− φ(t))≤ 1/4. Since ∥U ∥∗ = 1 (rank-one with unit singular
value) and |⟨U,X − Y ⟩| ≤ ∥U ∥∗ ∥ X − Y ∥ = ∥ X − Y ∥, we have
                                                                a              a
    ∥∇ f 1 ( X )−∇ f 1 (Y )∥∗ = a | φ(⟨U,X ⟩)− φ(⟨U,Y ⟩)|∥U ∥∗ ≤ |⟨U,X − Y ⟩| ≤ ∥ X − Y ∥,
                                                                4              4

and similarly ∥∇ f 2 ( X )−∇ f 2 (Y )∥∗ ≤ 4b ∥ X − Y ∥. Thus Assumption 2 holds with L∗ ≜
max{ a,b}/4.
   Finally, with X † ≜ 0, for the global objective f ≜ 12 ( f 1 + f 2 ) we have

                                                          a b  a−b
                  ∇ f ( X † ) = 21 ∇ f 1 (0)+∇ f 2 (0) = 21 − U =     U ̸= 0.
                                                            2 2    4
Therefore, the hypotheses and conclusion of Proposition 4.5 are satisfied in the general
matrix setting.

    This structural result underscores the role of the gradient-tracking step in Algo-
rithm 1: because msgn is nonlinear, replacing a tracked quantity by a purely local one can
break exact convergence under heterogeneous objectives. The next section asks a com-
plementary question: even when averaging is exact and topology is no obstacle, does
decentralized Muon retain the familiar federated linear-speedup effect?


5    Federated vs. Decentralized Linear Speedup
The previous subsection concerned exact convergence. We now turn to a complemen-
tary scaling question: can Muon exploit the usual linear-speedup effect from averaging
stochastic gradients? Here the answer again depends on when averaging happens. In
a federated or server-based architecture, gradients can be averaged first and polarized
afterward. In a fully decentralized architecture, each node polarizes a local noisy gra-
dient and only then communicates. The following toy example isolates this structural
difference in the simplest possible setting.
    We consider the vector case as a special instance of our matrix formulation, namely
X k = ( x1k ,x2k )⊤ ∈ R2×1 . Let
                                                  1
                                         f ( X ) ≜ x12 ,                            (5.1)
                                                  2
    so that ∇ f ( X ) = ( x1 ,0)⊤ . At iteration k, node i ∈ [ N ] observes the stochastic gradient
                                                k
                                              0      x
                        Gik = ∇ f ( X k )+         = 1k ,     ξ ik ∈ {+σ, −σ },                (5.2)
                                              ξ ik   ξi

    where {ξ ik } are i.i.d. across i and k with E[ξ ik ] = 0 and E[(ξ ik )2 ] = σ2 . The noise is
transverse to the signal: it acts only in the second coordinate.
42                                    ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-50


     Since X k ∈ R2×1 , the matrix-sign operator reduces to Euclidean normalization,

                                                     V
                                  msgn(V ) =              ,              msgn(0) = 0.                   (5.3)
                                                    ∥V ∥2

    To give the decentralized method its best possible chance, we assume a complete
graph with exact averaging and synchronized iterates. The only distinction is the order
of averaging and polarization.

                                                                                   1 N
                                                                                   N i∑
                     Decentralized Muon:                  X k +1 = X k − α ·             msgn( Gik ),   (5.4)
                                                                                      =1

                                                                                       !
                                                                               1 N k
                                                                               N i∑
                                                         k +1        k
                      Federated Muon:                X          = X − α · msgn       Gi .               (5.5)
                                                                                  =1

Proposition 5.1 (Federated Muon can speed up, decentralized Muon cannot). Consider
(5.1)–(5.3) with any σ > 0 and stepsize α ∈ (0,σ ).

     1. Decentralized Muon is insensitive to N. The first coordinate of (5.4) obeys the deter-
        ministic recursion                                  
                                                                             α
                                          x1k+1 = x1k 1 − q                             .             (5.6)
                                                                         ( x1k )2 + σ2

        Hence                                                     α k
                                                   | x1k+1 | ≥ 1 −   | x1 |,
                                                                   σ
        and reaching | x1T | ≤ ε| x10 | requires
                                                                
                                                         σ     1
                                                     T=Ω   log     ,
                                                         α     ε

        which does not improve with N.

     2. Federated Muon enjoys variance reduction. Let ξ̄ k ≜ N1 ∑iN=1 ξ ik , so that E[ξ̄ k ] = 0 and
                                                                                           √
        E[(ξ̄ k )2 ]= σ2 /N. Then the federated
                                            √   update (5.5) is driven by noise at scale σ/ N. In the
        noise-dominated regime | x1k | ≲ σ/ N, the corresponding iteration complexity scales as
                                                                 
                                                                1σ
                                                   T =O     log  √  ,
                                                        α N     ε

        which is the usual linear-speedup behavior.
ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-50                         43




Figure 1: Counterexample for linear speedup under transverse noise (σ = 50). Dashed
curves: federated Muon (5.5) with server-side averaging before polarization. Solid
curves: decentralized Muon (5.4) with local polarization before averaging. As N in-
creases, the federated curves accelerate clearly, whereas the decentralized curves essen-
tially overlap, indicating the absence of linear speedup.


Proof sketch. For decentralized Muon, note that

                                             q                          q
                               Gik       =       ( x1k )2 +(ξ ik )2 =       ( x1k )2 + σ2 .
                                     2

                                                                       q
Therefore the first coordinate of the local Muon direction equals x1k / ( x1k )2 + σ2 , which
is independent of both the node index i and
                                          q the sign of the noise. Averaging over i yields
(5.6), and the lower bound follows from                   ( x1k )2 + σ2 ≥ σ.
   For federated Muon, averaging occurs before normalization, so the second coordinate
becomes
  √      ξ̄ k with variance σ2 /N. The effective noise level is therefore reduced from σ to
σ/ N, which gives the stated complexity in the noise-dominated regime.




    This counterexample is useful precisely because topology plays no role in it: the graph
is complete and averaging is exact. The failure of linear speedup comes solely from local
polarization before averaging. In that sense, the example isolates a structural difference
between federated Muon and fully decentralized Muon rather than a weakness of any
particular communication scheme.
    Figure 1 visualizes the same phenomenon for σ = 50 and N ∈{1,8,64,256}. The dashed
federated curves accelerate as N grows, while the solid decentralized curves nearly over-
lap across all choices of N.
44                            ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-50


6     Numerical Experiments
6.1   Experimental Setup
We use two benchmarks that stress different parts of the decentralized Muon story:
CIFAR-100 with strong cross-node heterogeneity, and GPT-2 fine-tuning on Wikitext-2
with a much milder, near-IID partition. Throughout, we compare SUDA–M UON -ED,
SUDA–M UON -ATC-GT, and D E M UON, and all quantitative summaries are computed
from pre-aggregated CSV logs produced by the training scripts.
    For CIFAR-100, we use the standard 50,000/10,000 train/test split, a ResNet-18-style
model with 100 output classes, and a Dirichlet partition with concentration α = 0.05,
which produces severe label skew across workers. The main comparison uses N = 10
nodes on a ring with mixing parameter ρ = 0.25, batch size 512 per node, constant step-
size η = 0.03, EMA parameter β = 0.9, weight decay 5 × 10−4 , and 25 training epochs.
Unless otherwise stated, each configuration is run with 3 random seeds, and we report
the performance of the averaged model.
    We also include two CIFAR-100 extensions aimed at the communication story. First,
fixing SUDA–M UON -ED, we vary the topology and node count over N ∈ {4,8,12} to
isolate how system scale changes the preferred graph. Second, we run a larger and longer
experiment with N = 20 ring-connected nodes for 100 epochs using a slightly smaller
constant stepsize η = 0.01. This long-horizon setting is where steady-state communication
effects should be easiest to see.
    For GPT-2/Wikitext-2, each node hosts the pretrained gpt2 model. We tokenize the
corpus into length-512 sequences, use local batch size 16, train for 4 epochs with base
stepsize η = 0.03, and apply a warmup-plus-cosine schedule. The main comparison uses
a 15-node ring, while the ablation again varies topology and node count for SUDA–
M UON -ED. Each GPT configuration is run with 2 seeds, and we report validation per-
plexity at epoch 4.


6.2   Results and Analysis
CIFAR-100 main comparison (10-node ring). The short-horizon 10-node ring bench-
mark is relatively balanced. After 25 epochs, all three decentralized Muon variants finish
within about 0.6 accuracy points of one another, as shown in Table 1. SUDA–M UON -
ATC-GT achieves the highest mean final accuracy, while D E M UON is statistically very
close and SUDA–M UON -ED remains competitive despite the strongly non-IID split. So
the right reading of this table is not that one method wins decisively at a short budget; it
is that the SUDA-based instantiations already match D E M UON in the default heteroge-
neous ring regime.
    The variance pattern is also informative. SUDA–M UON -ATC-GT has the smallest
spread across seeds, which is consistent with the intuition that explicit correction of cross-
node drift can stabilize training even when the final means are close. In other words, the
ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-50                            45


Table 1: CIFAR-100 top-1 test accuracy under a 10-node ring topology with Dirichlet
heterogeneity α = 0.05. We report mean ± population standard deviation over three seeds
for the final accuracy at epoch 25. Higher is better.

       Method                          #Nodes      Topology         α       ρ    Final acc (%)
       SUDA–M UON -ED                      10         ring       0.05     0.25    44.99 ± 5.19
       SUDA–M UON -ATC-GT                  10         ring       0.05     0.25    45.56 ± 3.18
       D E M UON                           10         ring       0.05     0.25    45.50 ± 5.57

Table 2: CIFAR-100 test accuracy for SUDA–M UON -ED under varying numbers of nodes
and topologies. We report mean ± population standard deviation over three seeds of
final and best test accuracy. Bold values indicate the best performance within each node-
count group.

                   #Nodes         Topology          Final acc (%)       Best acc (%)
                       4       fully connected       51.71 ± 0.94       53.71 ± 0.57
                       4              line           51.76 ± 1.04       53.22 ± 0.95
                       4             ring            53.23 ± 0.30       55.27 ± 1.53
                       4              star           52.93 ± 0.73       53.21 ± 0.33
                       8       fully connected       47.69 ± 0.55       47.82 ± 0.72
                       8              line           45.91 ± 1.27       46.07 ± 1.03
                       8             ring            45.90 ± 0.97       47.04 ± 0.69
                       8              star           50.19 ± 1.60       50.94 ± 0.98
                      12       fully connected       43.62 ± 2.86       45.14 ± 3.43
                      12              line           37.26 ± 5.32       39.40 ± 4.93
                      12             ring            41.72 ± 3.73       43.03 ± 4.47
                      12              star           42.19 ± 4.76       42.19 ± 4.76


short-horizon experiment does not yet separate the methods strongly by final accuracy,
but it already suggests that the SUDA coupling is not paying an optimization penalty for
using the more structured primal–dual backbone.
    CIFAR-100 ablation on topology and node count. Fixing the optimizer to SUDA–
M UON -ED, Table 2 shows that the preferred topology changes with scale. At N = 4, ring
is best. At N = 8, star becomes strongest. At N = 12, fully connected is best and the
line graph degrades the most. This is the clearest finite-time sign that graph effects are
real but problem dependent: the communication backbone is not a mere implementation
detail, yet neither is there a single topology that wins uniformly.
    This ablation is useful for the paper’s story because it isolates the SUDA backbone
itself. Once the local Muon geometry is fixed, changing only the graph still produces
 46                                                        ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-50


 Table 3: CIFAR-100 training loss and test accuracy after 100 epochs on a 20-node ring
 topology. We report mean ± population standard deviation over three seeds. Bold entries
 indicate the best values.

                           Method                         #Nodes      Epochs                            Final train loss      Final test acc (%)       Seeds
         SUDA–M UON -ED                                     20         100                                  0.281 ± 0.018          52.89 ± 0.82           3
       SUDA–M UON -ATC-GT                                   20         100                                  0.329 ± 0.008          48.58 ± 0.73           3
            D E M UON                                       20         100                                  0.386 ± 0.009          43.94 ± 1.68           3


                                                 SUDA--Muon-ED           SUDA--Muon-ATC-GT                               DeMuon
                    (a) CIFAR-100 (20-node ring): train loss (100 epochs)                              (b) CIFAR-100 (20-node ring): test accuracy (100 epochs)

                5                                                                                      50




                                                                             Top-1 test accuracy (%)
                4                                                                                      40



Training loss
                3                                                                                      30

                2                                                                                      20

                1                                                                                      10

                0                                                                                      0
                      0        20       40           60          80    100                                   0      20       40           60   80       100
                                             Epoch                                                                                Epoch

 Figure 2: CIFAR-100 performance of the three decentralized Muon variants on a 20-
 node ring over 100 epochs. SUDA–M UON -ED converges faster and finishes higher than
 SUDA–M UON -ATC-GT and D E M UON. Shaded regions, where visible, denote one stan-
 dard deviation over three seeds.


 visibly different transient outcomes, especially as N grows. That is exactly the regime
 where the topology-dependent correction terms should matter most in practice, even if
 the leading stochastic term in the theory is topology separated.
     CIFAR-100 extended training on a 20-node ring. The strongest empirical evidence
 for the SUDA+Muon design appears in the larger and longer non-IID run. Table 3 and
 Figure 2 show that SUDA–M UON -ED clearly separates from both alternatives after 100
 epochs on a 20-node ring: it attains the lowest final training loss and the highest final test
 accuracy, outperforming SUDA–M UON -ATC-GT by more than 4 points and D E M UON
 by nearly 9 points in final accuracy. This is the setting where the advantage of the SUDA-
 style correction is no longer subtle.
     The trajectory plot sharpens the comparison. During the first half of training, both
 SUDA-based variants already stay ahead of D E M UON; later on, SUDA–M UON -ED con-
 tinues improving and cleanly overtakes SUDA–M UON -ATC-GT. So the most defensi-
ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-50                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       47


Table 4: Validation perplexity on Wikitext-2 for GPT-2 under a 15-node ring topology af-
ter four training epochs. Values are means over two seeds. Lower is better; bold indicates
the lowest perplexity.

                                                                              Method                                                                                                                                                                          #Nodes                                Topology                                                      Seeds                                 Eval ppl (4 epochs)
                                                                               SUDA–M UON -ED                                                                                                                                                                             15                                    ring                                                           2                                             18.1396
                                                                               SUDA–M UON -ATC-GT                                                                                                                                                                         15                                    ring                                                           2                                             18.1406
                                                                               D E M UON                                                                                                                                                                                  15                                    ring                                                           2                                             18.1401

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           * 3 7    : L N L W H [ W     6 8 ' $   0 X R Q  ( '    W R S R O R J \  D Q G  Q R G H  F R X Q W  D E O D W L R Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            5 L Q J            ) X O O \  F R Q Q H F W H G             / L Q H         6 W D U




                                                         * 3 7    : L N L W H [ W        Q R G H  U L Q J    Y D O L G D W L R Q  S H U S O H [ L W \  Y V  H S R F K V                                                                            1                                                                                               1                                                                  1      
                                                 
                                                                                                                                                     6 8 ' $   0 X R Q  ( '                                                            
                                                                                                                                                 6 8 ' $   0 X R Q  $ 7 &  * 7




                                                                                                                                                                                            9 D O L G D W L R Q  S H U S O H [ L W \
                                                                                                                                                     ' H 0 X R Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      




 9 D O L G D W L R Q  S H U S O H [ L W \
                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
                                                 

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
                                                 

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                    ( S R F K                                                                                                                                       ( S R F K                                                                                          ( S R F K                                                                 ( S R F K


(a) Main 15-node ring                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (b) Ablation over node count and topology.
run.

Figure 3: Validation perplexity of decentralized Muon variants on GPT-2 / Wikitext-
2. The left panel compares SUDA–M UON -ED, SUDA–M UON -ATC-GT, and D E M UON
under the main 15-node ring configuration, while the right panel reports the SUDA–
M UON -ED topology ablation. Shaded regions denote one standard deviation over two
seeds.


ble claim is tied to this specific regime: in the demanding 20-node, 100-epoch non-IID
setting, both SUDA-based variants outperform D E M UON, and among the instantiations
tested here SUDA–M UON -ED is the strongest.
    GPT-2 / Wikitext-2 main comparison (15-node ring). The language-modeling pic-
ture is intentionally different. Under the 15-node ring, the three decentralized Muon
variants are almost indistinguishable after 4 epochs, with validation perplexities clus-
tered between 18.1396 and 18.1406 in Table 4. We therefore do not read this benchmark
as evidence that one decentralized Muon mechanism dominates the others. The useful
message is instead that the SUDA-based variants remain fully competitive in the benign
near-IID regime; adopting the SUDA backbone does not sacrifice performance when the
communication problem is mild.
    GPT-2 / Wikitext-2 ablation on topology and node count. Fixing the optimizer to
SUDA–M UON -ED, Table 5 shows that all topologies remain close at N = 4, while fully
connected becomes best at N = 8 and N = 12. The absolute spread is still small, so this is
not a large-effect benchmark, but it reinforces the same practical lesson as on CIFAR-100:
the graph interacts with task statistics and scale, and the preferred topology can shift as
48                           ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-50


Table 5: Validation perplexity of SUDA–M UON -ED on Wikitext-2 after four training
epochs under varying numbers of nodes and topologies. Values are means over the avail-
able seeds. Lower is better; bold indicates the best performance within each node-count
group.

                    #Nodes        Topology          Eval ppl (4 epochs)
                        4      fully connected              15.75
                        4             line                  15.73
                        4            ring                   15.74
                        4             star                  15.72
                        8      fully connected              15.88
                        8             line                  15.97
                        8            ring                   15.94
                        8             star                  16.09
                       12      fully connected              16.12
                       12             line                  16.31
                       12            ring                   16.28
                       12             star                  16.53


those conditions change.


7    Conclusion
This paper studies one specific obstruction in fully decentralized Muon: the polarization
step is nonlinear, so it does not interact with gossip averaging in the same way as an
ordinary gradient step. SUDA–Muon addresses that obstruction by placing Muon inside
the SUDA primal–dual backbone, which lets us compare several decentralized correction
mechanisms within one template.
     The main theoretical message is that the dominant stochastic term remains topology-
free, while the graph enters only through faster-decaying corrections. The main structural
message is even simpler: tracking before polarization is not optional in general. Without
it, one can construct smooth heterogeneous problems on which the averaged iterate stays
at a non-stationary point.
     The second conceptual message is a contrast with federated Muon. In our linear-
speedup
    √      counterexample, server-side averaging before polarization recovers the usual
σ/ N variance reduction, while fully decentralized local polarization before averaging
does not, even on a complete graph with exact averaging.
     Our experiments on CIFAR-100 and GPT-2/Wikitext-2 are consistent with this pic-
ture. Short-horizon and near-IID runs make the decentralized Muon variants look simi-
REFERENCES                                                                                 49


lar, but in the 20-node, 100-epoch non-IID CIFAR-100 setting both SUDA-based variants
outperform D E M UON, with SUDA–M UON -ED performing best. When the partition is
near IID, the different SUDA–Muon instances behave much more similarly and the best
topology can shift.
     Natural next steps include communication-efficient variants with compression,
sharper rates under additional structure such as PL-type conditions, online tuning of the
stepsize and EMA parameters, and larger-scale experiments that test whether the same
topology effects persist for bigger models and graphs.


References
 [1] Sulaiman A. Alghunaim and Kun Yuan. A unified and refined convergence anal-
     ysis for non-convex decentralized learning. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control,
     67(11):5922–5937, 2022.

 [2] Sulaiman A. Alghunaim, Kun Yuan, and Ali H. Sayed. Suda: A unifying framework
     for decentralized optimization with sharp topology dependence. IEEE Transactions
     on Automatic Control, 67(10):5305–5320, 2022.

 [3] Michael Blot, David Picard, Matthieu Cord, and Nicolas Thome. Gossip training for
     deep learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.09726, 2016.

 [4] Jeff Daily, Abhinav Vishnu, Charles Siegel, Thomas Warfel, and Vinay Amatya. Gos-
     sipgrad: Scalable deep learning using gossip communication based asynchronous
     gradient descent. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.05880, 2018.

 [5] Vineet Gupta, Tomer Koren, and Yoram Singer. Shampoo: Preconditioned stochastic
     tensor optimization. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning,
     2018.

 [6] Chuan He, Shuyi Ren, Jingwei Mao, and Erik G. Larsson. Demuon: A decentralized
     muon for matrix optimization over graphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.01377, 2025.

 [7] Keller Jordan, Yuchen Jin, Vlado Boza, Jiacheng You, Franz Cesista, Laker New-
     house, and Jeremy Bernstein. Muon: An optimizer for hidden layers in neural net-
     works, 2024.

 [8] Xiangru Lian, Ce Zhang, Huan Zhang, Cho-Jui Hsieh, Wei Zhang, and Ji Liu. Can
     decentralized algorithms outperform centralized algorithms? a case study for de-
     centralized parallel stochastic gradient descent. In Advances in Neural Information
     Processing Systems, volume 30, 2017.

 [9] Jingyuan Liu, Jianlin Su, Xingcheng Yao, Zhejun Jiang, Guokun Lai, Yulun Du, Yi-
     dao Qin, Weixin Xu, Enzhe Lu, Junjie Yan, Yanru Chen, Huabin Zheng, Yibo Liu,
50                                                                            REFERENCES


     Shaowei Liu, Bohong Yin, Weiran He, Han Zhu, Yuzhi Wang, Jianzhou Wang, Meng-
     nan Dong, Zheng Zhang, Yongsheng Kang, Hao Zhang, Xinran Xu, Yutao Zhang,
     Yuxin Wu, Xinyu Zhou, and Zhilin Yang. Muon is scalable for llm training. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2502.16982, 2025.

[10] Junkang Liu, Fanhua Shang, Junchao Zhou, Hongying Liu, Yuanyuan Liu, and
     Jin Liu. Fedmuon: Accelerating federated learning with matrix orthogonalization.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.27403, 2025.

[11] Noam Shazeer and Mitchell Stern. Adafactor: Adaptive learning rates with sublin-
     ear memory cost. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning,
     2018.

[12] Wei Shen, Ruichuan Huang, Minhui Huang, Cong Shen, and Jiawei Zhang. On the
     convergence analysis of muon. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.23737, 2025.

[13] Wei Shi, Qing Ling, Gang Wu, and Wotao Yin. Extra: An exact first-order algorithm
     for decentralized consensus optimization. SIAM Journal on Optimization, 25(2):944–
     966, 2015.

[14] Yuki Takezawa, Anastasia Koloskova, Xiaowen Jiang, and Sebastian U. Stich. Fed-
     muon: Federated learning with bias-corrected lmo-based optimization. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2509.26337, 2025.

[15] Hanlin Tang, Xiangru Lian, Ming Yan, Ce Zhang, and Ji Liu. D2 : Decentralized train-
     ing over decentralized data. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine
     Learning, 2018.

[16] Shuche Wang, Fengzhuo Zhang, Jiaxiang Li, Cunxiao Du, Chao Du, Tianyu Pang,
     Zhuoran Yang, Mingyi Hong, and Vincent Y. F. Tan. Muon outperforms adam in
     tail-end associative memory learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.26030, 2025.

[17] Kun Yuan, Sulaiman A. Alghunaim, and Xinmeng Huang. Removing data het-
     erogeneity influence enhances network topology dependence of decentralized sgd.
     Journal of Machine Learning Research, 2021.

[18] Shuchen Zhu, Boao Kong, Songtao Lu, Xinmeng Huang, and Kun Yuan. Sparkle: A
     unified single-loop primal-dual framework for decentralized bilevel optimization.
     In Proceedings of the Neural Information Processing Systems Conference, 2024.
CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math.                                              Vol. x, No. x, pp. 1-25
doi:                                                                  xx 20xx




Accelerated Decentralized Gradient Descent for Strongly
Convex Optimization
ReasFlow Paper Copilot


          Abstract. Decentralized stochastic optimization is a standard framework for large-
          scale learning over networks where a central coordinator is unavailable or undesirable.
          In this paper we propose Multi-Gossip Accelerated DSGD (MC-ADSGD), a decentral-
          ized stochastic optimization algorithm that combines a Nesterov-type primal–dual ex-
          trapolation with a multi-round accelerated gossip averaging primitive (FGA). At each
          outer iteration, the proposed algorithm performs two calls to FGA with gossip depth
          R, thereby allowing multiple rounds of communication within one optimization step.
          Under standard smoothness, strong convexity, and bounded-variance assumptions,
          we establish a non-asymptotic convergence guarantee that makes explicit the depen-
          dence on (µ,L,σ2 ,n,R,β) and on a heterogeneity quantity G ∗ measuring the mismatch
          between local and global optima. The resulting bound consists of a linearly decaying
          transient term together with stochastic and heterogeneity-dependent residual terms.
          The corresponding communication-complexity consequence exhibits the scaling
                                                    s         !
                                          e    σ2     L   1
                                         O        +     p       ,
                                              µnϵ     µ 1− β

          up to logarithmic factors, with the heterogeneity contribution entering through the
                                                                                        p
          residual floor in the convergence bound. This also yields the guideline R= e
                                                                                    O(1/ 1 − β)
          for the gossip depth.
AMS subject classifications: 90C25, 68W15, 65K05
Key words: Decentralized optimization, stochastic gradient methods, distributed learning, com-
munication complexity, gossip algorithms



1 Introduction
Decentralized stochastic optimization has become a standard tool for large-scale learning
when data and computation are distributed across many workers but a central parameter
server is either undesirable or unavailable. In such systems, each node only exchanges
messages with its neighbors according to an underlying communication graph. This ar-
chitecture improves robustness, alleviates the single-point bottleneck of centralized syn-
chronization, and naturally matches settings where data are generated and stored at the

http://www.global-sci.org/csiam-am                  1                   ©20xx Global-Science Press
2                            ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-25


edge. At the same time, local computation and network communication are tightly cou-
pled: aggressive local updates may accelerate descent, while insufficient mixing ampli-
fies disagreement across the network and slows global convergence.
    A large body of work has therefore focused on characterizing the trade-off between
optimization progress and consensus error for decentralized stochastic gradient meth-
ods. Classical decentralized SGD (often called D-SGD or D-PSGD) uses one consensus
step per iteration and achieves convergence guarantees that explicitly depend on the
spectral gap of the mixing matrix, the condition number of the objective, and the vari-
ance of the stochastic gradients [5, 14, 17]. Subsequent methods such as EXTRA, exact
diffusion, and gradient-tracking variants reduce steady-state bias and improve commu-
nication efficiency by better correcting the drift between local models and the network av-
erage [7, 11, 13, 18]. In parallel, accelerated methods and multi-consensus schemes have
demonstrated that several rounds of communication per iteration, possibly combined
with polynomial (Chebyshev-type) gossip, can substantially improve the dependence on
the spectral gap [2, 4, 12].
    Despite substantial progress on decentralized optimization, it remains useful to un-
derstand how accelerated optimization dynamics and accelerated communication prim-
itives interact in the stochastic strongly convex regime. In particular, one would like to
clarify how multiple communication rounds within each outer iteration affect the over-
all dependence on the condition number, the network spectral gap, the stochastic noise
level, and the residual terms induced by data heterogeneity.
    Motivated by this question, we propose Multi-Gossip Accelerated DSGD (MC-ADSGD),
a decentralized stochastic optimization algorithm that combines a Nesterov-type primal–
dual extrapolation with two calls to a fast gossip averaging operator (FGA) per outer it-
eration. The gossip depth R controls the number of communication rounds inside each
FGA call. In the parameter regime considered in our analysis, we further couple the mini-
batch size and the gossip depth through the choice B = R, so that increasing R improves
communication accuracy while also reducing gradient variance.
    Our focus in this paper is on presenting the proposed MC-ADSGD method and mak-
ing its convergence and communication-complexity implications explicit in the strongly
convex stochastic setting. Under standard smoothness, strong convexity, and bounded-
variance assumptions, we derive a Lyapunov-based convergence bound consisting of a
linearly decaying term together with stochastic and heterogeneity-dependent residual
terms. This bound leads to a communication-complexity consequence of order
                                              s          !
                                     e   σ2      L    1
                                    O       +      p       ,
                                        µnϵ      µ 1− β
up to logarithmic factors, while the heterogeneity quantity G ∗ enters through the residual
accuracy floor.
    The purpose of the present paper is therefore to give a self-contained presentation
of the proposed algorithm and its analysis, and to isolate the communication-complexity
consequence of the current proof in a form suitable for further comparison and extension.
ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-25                     3


Contributions.      The main contributions of this work are as follows.

   • We propose Multi-Gossip Accelerated DSGD (MC-ADSGD), a decentralized stochas-
     tic optimization algorithm that combines a Nesterov-type primal–dual extrapola-
     tion with a multi-round accelerated gossip primitive (FGA), and we specify the
     parameter regime analyzed in this paper.

   • We derive an explicit strongly convex convergence guarantee for the proposed MC-
     ADSGD algorithm, whose dependence on (µ,L,σ2 ,n,R,β) and on the heterogeneity
     quantity G ∗ is stated in closed form.

   • We isolate the corresponding communication-complexity consequence,    p whichp ex-
                                        2
     hibits a stochastic term of order σ /(µnϵ) and a network term of order L/µ/ 1 − β,
                                                                            p
                                                                        e 1/ 1 − β).
     up to logarithmic factors, together with the scaling guideline R = O(

   • We collect the technical derivations in the appendix and organize the proof through
     a coupled Lyapunov argument that tracks both network disagreement and opti-
     mization error.


2 Related Work
This section briefly reviews the most relevant literature on decentralized stochastic opti-
mization, multi-round and accelerated gossip, and communication-efficient accelerated
methods, and situates Multi-Gossip Accelerated DSGD within this landscape.

Decentralized stochastic gradient methods. Early decentralized stochastic gradient meth-
ods such as D-SGD and D-PSGD [5, 14] apply one consensus (or gossip) step per iteration
and establish convergence guarantees that explicitly depend on the spectral gap of the
underlying mixing matrix. These methods are simple and widely used, but their com-
munication complexity can be suboptimal on poorly connected graphs, and their steady-
state error typically reflects a nonvanishing disagreement component. Variants based on
EXTRA and exact diffusion [13, 17, 18] as well as gradient-tracking schemes such as DIG-
ing, NEXT, and related algorithms [7, 11, 16] mitigate this issue by tracking the global
gradient more accurately and correcting local drift. Many of these works operate either
in deterministic or diminishing-stepsize regimes; when stochastic gradients and constant
stepsizes are considered, the resulting steady-state bounds often make the dependence
on noise and network parameters only partially explicit.

Gradient tracking and exact diffusion. Gradient-tracking methods maintain auxiliary
variables that estimate the average gradient across the network and use them to drive
local updates toward the global optimum. In the deterministic setting, such methods
achieve exact convergence and, in some cases, are known to be optimal up to logarithmic
4                            ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-25


factors in terms of the dependence on the condition number and the spectral gap [12].
In the stochastic strongly convex case, recent works have extended gradient tracking
and exact diffusion to handle gradient noise and non-identical data distributions across
nodes [10, 15]. Compared with these approaches, the proposed MC-ADSGD algorithm
does not maintain an explicit gradient-tracking variable; instead, it combines a Nesterov-
type primal–dual extrapolation with multi-round accelerated gossip and ties the batch
size to the gossip depth. Our analysis focuses on making the communication complexity
in this specific design explicit, rather than deriving a general-purpose optimality result
for all gradient-tracking variants.

Multi-round and accelerated gossip. The idea of performing multiple gossip rounds
per iteration to accelerate consensus dates back to early work on multi-consensus meth-
ods and polynomial filtering of the mixing matrix [2, 9]. Chebyshev-accelerated gossip
schemes design a polynomial in the mixing matrix that minimizes the worst-case contrac-
                                                                                  p
tion factor over the spectrum, yielding a number of rounds that scales as O( e 1/ 1 − β)
with the inverse square root of the spectral gap. Such primitives have been used both
as stand-alone averaging mechanisms [2] and as building blocks within decentralized
optimization algorithms [4, 12]. The FGA operator used in the proposed MC-ADSGD
method is an instance of this general idea: it implements an accelerated gossip averaging
procedure with a parameter R controlling the number of internal communication rounds
and a contraction factor ρ that depends explicitly on R and the spectral gap. Our con-
tribution is to embed this primitive into a stochastic accelerated optimization algorithm
and to carry out a Lyapunov analysis that tracks both the disagreement recursion and the
optimization recursion.

Accelerated decentralized methods and communication complexity. Beyond multi-
consensus, several works have investigated acceleration in decentralized optimization,
either via Nesterov-type momentum, dual acceleration, or primal–dual mirror maps [3,
4, 8, 12]. These methods often achieve communication complexity bounds that are opti-
malp(or nearly
            p optimal) in the deterministic strongly convex setting, with a characteris-
tic L/µ/ 1 − β dependence on the condition number and spectral gap. Extensions to
time-varying or directed graphs further refine these guarantees under more general com-
munication models [1, 6]. However, many of these results either assume exact oracles,
lack fully explicit constants in the stochastic regime, or leave the relationship between
the number of communication rounds per iteration and the stochastic batch size implicit.

Positioning of this work. The algorithm proposed in this paper, Multi-Gossip Accel-
erated DSGD (MC-ADSGD), combines several ingredients that have each appeared, in
different forms, in the decentralized optimization literature: local stochastic gradients,
multi-round accelerated gossip, and an accelerated extrapolation structure. Our em-
phasis here is not on claiming a universal improvement over all existing decentralized
ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-25                              5


methods, but on introducing this particular algorithmic design in the strongly convex
stochastic regime and making the resulting communication-complexity dependence ex-
plicit. In particular, the analysis highlights how the gossip depth R, the spectral gap 1 − β,
and the stochastic noise level jointly enter the final bound, while the heterogeneity term
contributes an explicit residual component.


3 Problem Setup
We consider the decentralized stochastic optimization problem

                                                          1 n
                                                          n i∑
                                         min f ( x ) :=         f i ( x ),
                                         x ∈Rd               =1

where node i has access only to its local objective f i , its local stochastic gradient or-
acle, and messages received from its graph neighbors. For a stacked matrix variable
X = [ x1 ,...,xn ] ∈ Rd×n , we define the network average and disagreement operators by

                                         1 n                      1
                                         n i∑
                                 x̄ :=         xi ,       Π := I − 11⊤ .
                                            =1
                                                                  n

The quantity ΠX measures consensus error. Throughout the paper, x ⋆ denotes the unique
minimizer of f , f ⋆ := f ( x ⋆ ), and for each local objective we define f i⋆ := minx f i ( x ). The
heterogeneity measure is
                                                     1 n
                                         G ∗ := f ⋆ − ∑ f i⋆ .
                                                     n i =1
The quantity G ∗ captures heterogeneity at the optimum; in particular, G ∗ = 0 in the
homogeneous-optimum case.
   Our analysis in Section 5 is based on the following assumptions.
Assumption 1 (L-smoothness). Each local objective f i is differentiable and L-smooth.
Assumption 2 (µ-strong convexity). Each local objective f i is µ-strongly convex.
Assumption 3 (Unbiased stochastic gradients with bounded variance). The stochastic
gradient oracle at node i is unbiased and has bounded conditional variance:
                                                                                    
            E[∇ Fi ( x;ξ i ) | x ] = ∇ f i ( x ), E ∥∇ Fi ( x;ξ i )−∇ f i ( x )∥2 | x ≤ σ2 .

Assumption 4 (Communication matrix). The communication matrix W is symmetric and
doubly stochastic. Its spectral gap parameter is denoted by β ∈ (0,1].
   Because the batch size and the communication depth are tied together in our final
design, we set
                                      B = R,
6                                   ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-25


Algorithm 1 FastGossipAverage (FGA)
Require: Local vector vi , mixing matrix W, rounds R, acceleration parameter η
Ensure: FGAR (v)i
 1: for all nodes i = 1,...,n in parallel do
         (0)
 2:     ai ← vi
            (1)              (0)
    3:    ai ← ∑nj=1 Wij a j
    4:    for r = 1,2,...,R − 1 do
               (r +1)                       (r )   (r −1)
    5:        ai      ← (1 + η ) ∑nj=1 Wij a j − ηai
    6:    end for
                    ( R)
    7:    return ai
    8: end for


where R is the number of accelerated gossip rounds used inside each outer iteration. The
optimization parameter is                  r
                                              µγ
                                        θ=       .
                                               2
For the accelerated gossip operator, we use the effective contraction parameter
                                      √       p
                                 ρ : = 2(1 − 1 − β ) R .
As R increases, the communication error decreases geometrically through ρ.


4 MC-ADSGD Algorithm
This section gives a concise specification of MC-ADSGD. We first state the accelerated
gossip primitive used to suppress network disagreement, and then present the full itera-
tive scheme together with its per-iteration oracle and communication costs.

Communication primitive: FastGossipAverage (FGA).

Main procedure: Multi-Gossip Accelerated DSGD.                      The iteration order is
         stochastic gradient → z-update (FGA) → x-update (FGA) → y-extrapolation.

Design rationale and per-iteration complexity. The three state variables ( x (k) ,z(k) ,y(k) )
have distinct algorithmic roles. The point y(k) is the query location for stochastic gradi-
ents, z(k) aggregates descent information and is consensus-refined, and x (k) tracks the pri-
mal progress. Accordingly, each outer iteration uses two FGA calls: one in the z-update
and one in the x-update, followed by

                                     y(k+1) = (1 − θ ) x (k+1) + θz(k+1) .
ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-25                   7


Algorithm 2 Multi-Gossip Accelerated DSGD (MC-ADSGD)
Require: Stepsize γ, momentum parameter θ, gossip depth R
                (0)    (0)     (0)
 1: Initialize xi = yi = zi = 0 for all i = 1,...,n
 2: for k = 0,1,2,... do
 3:     for all nodes i = 1,...,n in parallel do
 4:         Sample ξ i,k+1,1 ,...,ξ 
                                    i,k +1,R  
             ( k +1)                       (k)
 5:         gi       ← R1 ∑sR=1 ∇ Fi yi ;ξ i,k+1,s
                               θ ( k ) ( k ) ( k +1) 
             ( k +1)              z +µy − g
 6:         zi       ← FGAR γ           θ
                                        γ +µ            i 
                              
             ( k +1)
 7:         xi       ← FGAR (1 − θ ) x (k) + θz(k+1)
                                                                 i
             ( k +1)             ( k +1)         ( k +1)
 8:       yi   ← (1 − θ ) x i              + θzi
 9:    end for
10: end for


At iteration k, node i forms

                                      ( k +1)        1 R          (k)         
                                    gi           =     ∑
                                                     R s =1
                                                            ∇ Fi yi ;ξ i,k+1,s ,

which requires R stochastic-gradient oracle calls (hence nR calls over the network). The
communication cost is exactly two depth-R FGA invocations, i.e., 2R gossip rounds per
outer iteration. Therefore, after K outer iterations, the total communication budget is

                                                       T = 2RK,

which is the complexity variable used in Section 5.


5     Upper-Bound Analysis
This section presents the principal upper-bound theorem together with the supporting
inequalities used in its proof. Detailed derivations are deferred to Appendix A. In addi-
tion to the heterogeneity quantity

                                                               1 n ⋆
                                                               n i∑
                                                 G∗ = f ⋆ −          fi ,
                                                                  =1

used throughout the paper, the derivation also employs the auxiliary quantity
                                                           n
                                            e := 1 ∑ ∥∇ f i ( x ⋆ )∥2 .
                                            G
                                                nL i=1
8                                 ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-25


5.1    Primary upper-bound theorem
This subsection states the final communication-complexity guarantee in a compact form.
The theorem below summarizes the dependence on optimization conditioning ( L,µ), net-
work connectivity (1 − β), stochastic noise level σ2 , and the target accuracy ϵ. The explicit
parameter construction used to realize this bound is deferred to Appendix A, so that the
main text focuses on the final complexity consequence.
Theorem 5.1 (Convergence complexity for the strongly convex case). Given L ≥ 0, n ≥ 1,
β ∈ [0,1), and σ > 0, assume that the local objectives { f i }in=1 satisfy Assumptions 1 and 2 with
µ > 0, that the stochastic gradient oracles satisfy Assumption 3, and that the gossip matrix satisfies
Assumption 4. Let
                                          ∆ x : = ∥ x (0) − x ⋆ ∥ 2 .
Fix a target accuracy ϵ ∈ (0,L∆ x ). Run Multi-Gossip Accelerated DSGD in Algorithm 2 with
parameter choices (K,R,γ) specified in Appendix Theorem A.2. Then the total number of gossip
rounds
                                             T⋆ (ϵ)
needed to attain                                                 
                                         E f ( x̄ (K) )− f ( x ⋆ ) ≤ ϵ
satisfies
                                     2
                                                 s               !
                                e  σ        L∆ x     L/µ       L∆ x
                       T⋆ (ϵ) = O      ln         +       ln           .                          (5.1)
                                  µnϵ        ϵ       1− β       ϵ

Here the e
         O(·) notation suppresses logarithmic factors together with the heterogeneity-dependent
contribution expressed in the main text through G ∗ .
    The proof of Theorem 5.1 proceeds through an explicit admissible-rate bound estab-
lished in Appendix A. The auxiliary results below record the main ingredients that enter
that proof.

5.2    Supporting lemmas
We next collect the structural estimates that drive the proof of Theorem 5.1. The roles
of these lemmas are as follows: (i) relate the proof-internal heterogeneity quantity G e to
                        ∗
the paper quantity G , (ii) control local model errors around decentralized surrogates,
(iii) quantify stochastic variance reduction under batch size R, and (iv) establish coupled
recursions for disagreement and optimization Lyapunov terms. Their full derivations are
provided in Appendix A.
                            e and G ∗ ). Under Assumption 1,
Lemma 5.1 (Relation between G
                                                 e ≤ 2G ∗ .
                                                 G
                                e = 0.
In particular, if G ∗ = 0, then G
ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-25                                       9


Lemma 5.2 (Local model bounds around decentralized surrogates). Under Assumptions 1–
2, define
                                 1 n                                
                      f (ȳ;y) := ∑ f i (yi )+⟨∇ f i (yi ), ȳ − yi ⟩ ,
                                 n i =1
and
                                                                1 n
                                                                n i∑
                           D f ( x;y) := f ( x )− f (ȳ;y)−           ⟨∇ f i (yi ),x − ȳ⟩.
                                                                   =1
Then, for every x ∈ Rd ,
                                        1 n                         µ            µ
                  f ( x ) ≥ f (ȳ;y)+     ∑
                                        n i =1
                                               ⟨∇ f i (yi ),x − ȳ⟩+ ∥ x − ȳ∥2 + ∥Πy∥2F ,
                                                                    2            2n
                                        1 n                         L             L
                  f ( x ) ≤ f (ȳ;y)+     ∑
                                        n i =1
                                               ⟨∇ f i (yi ),x − ȳ⟩+ ∥ x − ȳ∥2 + ∥Πy∥2F .
                                                                    2            2n
Consequently,
              µ             µ                     L             L
                ∥ x − ȳ∥2 + ∥Πy∥2F ≤ D f ( x;y) ≤ ∥ x − ȳ∥2 + ∥Πy∥2F .
              2             2n                    2            2n
Lemma 5.3 (Conditional variance bounds). Under Assumption 3, let

                           (k)    1 R          (k)                              1 n (k)
                         hi : =     ∑
                                  R s =1
                                         ∇ Fi yi ;ξ i,k,s ,           h̄(k) :=
                                                                                 n i∑
                                                                                       hi ,
                                                                                    =1
and define
                                            1 n             (k)
                                            n i∑
                    g(k) := Ek [h̄(k) ] =         ∇ f i ( y i ),      m(k+1) := Ek [z̄(k+1) ].
                                               =1
Then
                                         σ2                                             γ2 σ 2
                Ek ∥ h̄(k) − g(k) ∥2 ≤      ,       Ek ∥z̄(k+1) − m(k+1) ∥2 ≤                    .
                                         nR                                         (θ + µγ)2 nR
Lemma 5.4 (Disagreement potential recursion). Under Assumptions 1–4, define
                                           4ρ2 (1 + 2ρ2 ) 2           
                        Ψk := E ∥Πx (k) ∥2F +        2  2
                                                           θ E ∥Πz(k) ∥2F ,
                                               (1 − ρ )
and                                                                
                                                        (1 − ρ2 )2
                                                            2
                                  λ := max 2(1 − θ ) , 2              .
                                                      2ρ (1 + 2ρ2 )
Then, for all k ≥ 0,
                                               
             3ρ2      144L2 λρ4 (1 + ρ2 )γ2             72nL2 ρ4 (1 + ρ2 )γ2
Ψ k +1 ≤          2
                    +             2  3
                                                  Ψk +                       E∥ x̄ (k) − ȳ(k) ∥2
           1 + 2ρ           (1 − ρ )                        (1 − ρ2 )3
           144nLρ4 (1 + ρ2 )γ2                        144nLρ4 (1 + ρ2 )γ2             4         2  2          2
         +                      E   f ( x̄ (k)
                                               )− f ∗
                                                       +                     Ge + 24ρ (1 + ρ )γ (n − 1)σ .
                 (1 − ρ2 )3                                  (1 − ρ2 )3                      (1 − ρ2 )3 R
                                                                                                          (5.2)
10                                 ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-25


Lemma 5.5 (Optimization Lyapunov recursion). Under Assumptions 1–4, define
                                                 2       h                      i
                                                 θ    µθ
             Fk := E[ f ( x̄ (k) )]− f ( x ∗ )+     +     E ∥Ek−1 [z̄(k) ]− x ∗ ∥2 .
                                                 2γ 2
Then, for all k ≥ 0,
                                              
                                L           µ                         µ
          Fk+1 ≤ (1 − θ ) Fk +    −(1 − θ )      E∥Πy(k) ∥2F −(1 − θ ) E∥ x̄ (k) − ȳ(k) ∥2
                               2n           2n                        2
                     2     2
                                     
                    θ γσ       γL + 1
                 +                      .                                                            (5.3)
                     2nR (θ + µγ)2
Moreover, with
                       λ                             (1 − θ ) µ
             aΨ :=       L −(1 − θ )µ ,      b∆ : =              ,    ∆k := E∥ x̄ (k) − ȳ(k) ∥2 ,
                       n                                  2
and                                                                
                                           θ 2 γσ2         γL + 1
                                      D :=                            ,
                                            2nR           (θ + µγ)2
one has
                                 Fk+1 ≤ (1 − θ ) Fk + aΨ Ψk − b∆ ∆k + D.


6 Conclusion
We presented Multi-Gossip Accelerated DSGD, a decentralized stochastic optimization method
that combines accelerated optimization dynamics with accelerated multi-round gossip
communication. The main theorem gives an explicit strongly-convex convergence guar-
antee with transparent dependence on the stepsize, gossip depth, spectral gap, and stochas-
tic variance. Under the homogeneous-optimum condition G ∗ = 0, the resulting communi-
cation complexity                                            2
          p      pseparates into a stochastic term of order σ /(µnϵ) and a network term
of order L/µ/ 1 − β, up to logarithmic factors.
    From a methodological viewpoint, the analysis shows that optimization acceleration
and communication acceleration should be designed together: the benefit of the extrap-
olation dynamics appears only when the disagreement recursion is controlled strongly
enough by multi-gossip communication. This is the role of the FGA primitive and the
explicit condition on                 √       p
                                  ρ = 2(1 − 1 − β ) R .
   A natural next step is to extend the current analysis beyond the strongly convex
regime and to establish analogous explicit rates under weaker convexity assumptions.
Another important direction is to understand whether a similarly explicit accelerated
analysis can be carried out under more general network models, including time-varying
communication patterns.
ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-25                                            11


Appendix

A Detailed Proofs for the Theoretical Results
This appendix presents the proof details in the order of the supplied theory file, while
keeping the paper notation consistent with the main text.

Notation alignment.           In the main text, the heterogeneity measure is

                                     1 n ∗
                                     n i∑
                       G∗ := f ∗ −         fi ,     f i∗ := min f i ( x ),        f ∗ : = f ( x ∗ ).
                                                               x
                                        =1

The supplied proof file also uses the quantity
                                                      n
                                           e := 1 ∑ ∥∇ f i ( x ∗ )∥2 ,
                                           G
                                               nL i=1

which measures the mismatch of local gradients at the global minimizer. To avoid over-
                                                                   e throughout this ap-
loading the symbol G ∗ , we denote that proof-internal quantity by G
pendix.
                            e and the main-text heterogeneity G ∗ ). Assume each f i is
Lemma A.1 (Relation between G
convex and L-smooth. Then
                                    e ≤ 2G ∗ .
                                    G
                                e = 0.
In particular, if G ∗ = 0, then G

Proof. Let xi⋆ ∈ argminx f i ( x ), so that f i ( xi⋆ ) = f i⋆ and ∇ f i ( xi⋆ ) = 0. By co-coercivity for
L-smooth convex functions,
                                                                                                                 
    ∥∇ f i ( x ∗ )−∇ f i ( xi⋆ )∥2 ≤ 2L f i ( x ∗ )− f i ( xi⋆ )−⟨∇ f i ( xi⋆ ),x ∗ − xi⋆ ⟩ = 2L f i ( x ∗ )− f i⋆ .

Summing over i and dividing by nL yields
                                                                                            !
                     n                       n                                           n
              e = 1 ∑ ∥∇ f i ( x ∗ )∥2 ≤ 2 ∑ f i ( x ∗ )− f ⋆ = 2                    1
                                                             
              G                                            i                    f ∗ − ∑ f i⋆ = 2G ∗ .
                 nL i=1                  n i =1                                      n i =1

                                                    e = 0.
If G ∗ = 0, then the right-hand side is zero, hence G

A.1 Setup and assumptions
We consider
                                                             1 n
                                                             n i∑
                                            min f ( x ) :=         f i ( x ).
                                            x ∈Rd               =1
12                                       ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-25


For a stacked matrix X = [ x1 ,...,xn ] ∈ Rd×n , define

                                                 1 n                      1
                                                 n i∑
                                         x̄ :=         xi ,       Π := I − 11⊤ ,
                                                    =1
                                                                          n

so that ΠX measures disagreement. We write

                                  1 n (k)                       1 n (k)                        1 n (k)
                                  n i∑                          n i∑                           n i∑
                      x̄ (k) :=         xi ,         ȳ(k) :=         yi ,          z̄(k) :=         zi .
                                     =1                            =1                             =1

The algorithm parameters are
                        r
                          µγ                               √           p
                   θ :=      ,                      ρ :=       2(1 −       1 − β) R ,       B = R.
                           2
Assumption 5 (L-smoothness). Each local objective f i is differentiable and L-smooth.

Assumption 6 (µ-strong convexity). The global objective f is µ-strongly convex.

Assumption 7 (Unbiased stochastic gradients with bounded variance). For each node i,
                                                                                  
          E[∇ Fi ( x;ξ i ) | x ] = ∇ f i ( x ), E ∥∇ Fi ( x;ξ i )−∇ f i ( x )∥2 | x ≤ σ2 .

Assumption 8 (Communication matrix and accelerated gossip). The mixing matrix W is
symmetric and doubly stochastic. The accelerated gossip operator FGAR satisfies
                                                    √      p
               ∥ΠFGAR (U )∥2F ≤ ρ2 ∥ΠU ∥2F ,    ρ = 2(1 − 1 − β ) R ,

for every stacked matrix U.

   Because FGAR is a polynomial in a doubly stochastic matrix, it also preserves aver-
ages. Hence the averaged iterates satisfy
            θ (k)
            γ z̄  + µȳ(k) − ḡ(k+1)
z̄(k+1) =           θ
                                     ,           x̄ (k+1) = (1 − θ ) x̄ (k) + θ z̄(k+1) ,        ȳ(k) = (1 − θ ) x̄ (k) + θ z̄(k) .
                    γ +µ


A.2    Recursion for the disagreement potential
Lemma A.2 (Recursion of the disagreement potential). Define

                                              4ρ2 (1 + 2ρ2 ) 2           
                           Ψk := E ∥Πx (k) ∥2F +        2  2
                                                              θ E ∥Πz(k) ∥2F ,
                                                  (1 − ρ )
and                                                                     
                                                             (1 − ρ2 )2
                                      λ := max 2(1 − θ )2 , 2              .
                                                           2ρ (1 + 2ρ2 )
ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-25                                                  13


Then, for all k ≥ 0,
                                               
             3ρ2      144L2 λρ4 (1 + ρ2 )γ2             72nL2 ρ4 (1 + ρ2 )γ2
Ψ k +1 ≤          2
                    +             2  3
                                                  Ψk +                       E∥ x̄ (k) − ȳ(k) ∥2
           1 + 2ρ           (1 − ρ )                        (1 − ρ2 )3
           144nLρ4 (1 + ρ2 )γ2                        144nLρ4 (1 + ρ2 )γ2             4         2  2         2
         +                      E   f ( x̄ (k)
                                               )− f ∗
                                                       +                     Ge + 24ρ (1 + ρ )γ (n − 1)σ .
                 (1 − ρ2 )3                                  (1 − ρ2 )3                      (1 − ρ2 )3 R
                                                                                                         (A.1)

Proof. Set

         θ                  ( k +1)
                                           θ (k)
                                           γz    + µy(k) − g(k+1)
     A := + µ,          U             :=                            ,      V (k+1) := (1 − θ ) x (k) + θz(k+1) .
         γ                                              A

Then

      z(k+1) = FGAR (U (k+1) ),                 x (k+1) = FGAR (V (k+1) ),        y(k) = (1 − θ ) x (k) + θz(k) .

Applying the accelerated-gossip contraction to the z-update gives
                                                                                      2
                                                   ρ2 θ
                         ∥Πz(k+1) ∥2F ≤                 Πz (k)
                                                               + µΠy (k)
                                                                         − Πg ( k +1)
                                                                                        .
                                                   A2 γ                               F

Using ∥ a + b + c∥2 ≤ 3(∥ a∥2 +∥b∥2 +∥c∥2 ) and conditional expectation,
                                                                               
                    ( k +1) 2  3ρ2 θ 2     (k) 2   2    (k) 2         ( k +1) 2
            Ek ∥Πz         ∥F ≤ 2      ∥Πz ∥ F + µ ∥Πy ∥ F + Ek ∥Πg          ∥F .                                   (A.2)
                               A    γ2

Write
                            g(k+1) = ∇ f (y(k) )+ ζ (k+1) ,             Ek [ζ (k+1) ] = 0,
                                                                     (k)              (k)
where ∇ f (y(k) ) denotes the stacked matrix [∇ f 1 (y1 ),..., ∇ f n (yn )]. Then

                         Ek ∥Πg(k+1) ∥2F = ∥Π∇ f (y(k) )∥2F + Ek ∥Πζ (k+1) ∥2F .

For the deterministic term,
                                            n
                                                            (k)
               ∥Π∇ f (y(k) )∥2F ≤ 2 ∑ ∥∇ f i (yi )−∇ f i (ȳ(k) )∥2 + 2∥Π∇ f (ȳ(k) )∥2F .
                                           i =1

By L-smoothness,
                                n
                                                  (k)
                              ∑ ∥∇ fi (yi )−∇ fi (ȳ(k) )∥2 ≤ L2 ∥Πy(k) ∥2F .
                              i =1

Also,
               ∥Π∇ f (ȳ(k) )∥2F ≤ 2∥Π(∇ f (ȳ(k) )−∇ f ( x̄ (k) ))∥2F + 2∥Π∇ f ( x̄ (k) )∥2F ,
14                                        ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-25


with
                               ∥Π(∇ f (ȳ(k) )−∇ f ( x̄ (k) ))∥2F ≤ nL2 ∥ȳ(k) − x̄ (k) ∥2 .
For the remaining term, use ∥ a + b∥2 ≤ 2∥ a∥2 + 2∥b∥2 with a = ∇ f i ( x̄ (k) )−∇ f i ( x ∗ ) and
b = ∇ f i ( x ∗ ), and then the co-coercivity inequality for convex L-smooth functions:
                                                                                                                
                ∥∇ f i ( x̄ (k) )−∇ f i ( x ∗ )∥2 ≤ 2L f i ( x̄ (k) )− f i ( x ∗ )−⟨∇ f i ( x ∗ ), x̄ (k) − x ∗ ⟩ .

Summing over i and using ∑in=1 ∇ f i ( x ∗ ) = 0 gives
                                  n                                                 
                                 ∑ ∥∇ fi (x̄(k) )∥2 ≤ 4nL f (x̄(k) )− f ∗ + 2nLG.
                                                                               e
                                i =1

Therefore,
                                                                                          
     ∥Π∇ f (y(k) )∥2F ≤ 2L2 ∥Πy(k) ∥2F + 4nL2 ∥ x̄ (k) − ȳ(k) ∥2 + 16nL f ( x̄ (k) )− f ∗ + 8nL e
                                                                                                G.          (A.3)

For the stochastic part, since each node uses a mini-batch of size R,

                                                            ( k +1) 2      σ2
                                                   Ek ∥ ζ i       ∥ ≤         .
                                                                           R
                           ( k +1)
Let ζ̄ (k+1) := n1 ∑in=1 ζ i          . Then
                                                        n
                                                                ( k +1) 2
                                      ∥Πζ (k+1) ∥2F = ∑ ∥ζ i            ∥ − n∥ζ̄ (k+1) ∥2 .
                                                       i =1

Using conditional independence and zero conditional mean,

                                                              1 n           ( k +1) 2
                                                              n2 i∑
                                         Ek ∥ζ̄ (k+1) ∥2 =           Ek ∥ ζ i      ∥ ,
                                                                  =1

and hence
                                                                        ( n − 1) σ 2
                                               Ek ∥Πζ (k+1) ∥2F ≤                    .                      (A.4)
                                                                             R
Substituting (A.3) and (A.4) into (A.2) gives

                         3ρ2 (µ2 + 2L2 )                   12nL2 ρ2 (k)
     Ek ∥Πz(k+1) ∥2F ≤                    ∥  Πy  (k) 2
                                                     ∥ F +         ∥ x̄ − ȳ(k) ∥2
                               A2                            A2
                           48nLρ2           (k)       ∗
                                                         24nLρ2         2         2   2 2
                                                                   e + 3ρ (n − 1)σ + 3ρ θ ∥Πz(k) ∥2F .
                         +           f ( x̄     )−  f    +         G
                              A2                             A2            A2 R      A2 γ2
                                                                                                  (A.5)

Next, apply the accelerated-gossip contraction to the x-update:

     ∥Πx (k+1) ∥2F ≤ ρ2 ∥(1 − θ )Πx (k) + θΠz(k+1) ∥2F ≤ 2ρ2 (1 − θ )2 ∥Πx (k) ∥2F + 2ρ2 θ 2 ∥Πz(k+1) ∥2F .
ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-25                                  15


Also,
                                      Πy(k) = (1 − θ )Πx (k) + θΠz(k) ,
so
                      ∥Πy(k) ∥2F ≤ 2(1 − θ )2 ∥Πx (k) ∥2F + 2θ 2 ∥Πz(k) ∥2F ≤ λΨk .
Now multiply (A.5) by
                                                   4ρ2 (1 + 2ρ2 ) 2
                                            α :=                 θ
                                                     (1 − ρ2 )2
and add the result to the bound for ∥Πx (k+1) ∥2F . Before simplification this gives the same
intermediate recursion as in the supplied proof file. Finally use
             θ                      γ2                                           1          2
           A≥ ,            A −2 ≤      ,     1 + 2ρ2 ≤ 2(1 + ρ2 ),                     ≤           ,
             γ                      θ2                                       (1 − ρ2 )2 (1 − ρ2 )3
and absorb the ∥Πy(k) ∥2F term with the bound ∥Πy(k) ∥2F ≤ λΨk . This yields exactly (A.1).


A.3 Local surrogate bounds and the optimization Lyapunov recursion
Lemma A.3 (Local model bounds around decentralized surrogates). Define
                                1 n                                
                     f (ȳ;y) := ∑ f i (yi )+⟨∇ f i (yi ), ȳ − yi ⟩ ,
                                n i =1
and
                                                              1 n
                                                              n i∑
                           D f ( x;y) := f ( x )− f (ȳ;y)−         ⟨∇ f i (yi ),x − ȳ⟩.
                                                                 =1
Then, for every x ∈ Rd ,
                                       1 n                        µ            µ
                                       n i∑
                 f ( x ) ≥ f (ȳ;y)+         ⟨∇ f i (yi ),x − ȳ⟩+ ∥ x − ȳ∥2 + ∥Πy∥2F ,
                                          =1
                                                                  2            2n
                                       1 n                        L             L
                                       n i∑
                 f ( x ) ≤ f (ȳ;y)+         ⟨∇ f i (yi ),x − ȳ⟩+ ∥ x − ȳ∥2 + ∥Πy∥2F .
                                          =1
                                                                  2            2n
Consequently,
                   µ             µ                     L             L
                     ∥ x − ȳ∥2 + ∥Πy∥2F ≤ D f ( x;y) ≤ ∥ x − ȳ∥2 + ∥Πy∥2F .
                   2             2n                    2            2n
Proof. Apply the µ-strong convexity and L-smoothness inequalities to each f i at the pair
( x,yi ), average over i, and use the identity
                                 1 n                             1
                                 n i∑
                                       ∥ x − yi ∥2 = ∥ x − ȳ∥2 + ∥Πy∥2F .
                                    =1
                                                                 n

The claimed two-sided bound for D f ( x;y) follows immediately.
16                                ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-25


Lemma A.4 (Conditional variance bounds for averaged gradients and averaged z-updates).
Let
                   (k)   1 R        (k)                 1 n (k)
                  hi := ∑ ∇ Fi yi ;ξ i,k,s ,     h̄(k) := ∑ hi ,
                         R s =1                          n i =1
and define
                                           1 n             (k)
                                           n i∑
                   g(k) := Ek [h̄(k) ] =         ∇ f i ( y i ),          m(k+1) := Ek [z̄(k+1) ].
                                              =1
Then
                                        σ2                                                γ2 σ 2
               Ek ∥ h̄(k) − g(k) ∥2 ≤      ,       Ek ∥z̄(k+1) − m(k+1) ∥2 ≤                       .
                                        nR                                            (θ + µγ)2 nR
Proof. The first estimate follows from mini-batch variance reduction and conditional in-
dependence across nodes. For the second estimate, use the averaged z-update

                                                 θ z̄(k) + µγȳ(k) − γ h̄(k)
                                   z̄(k+1) =                                 ,
                                                           θ + µγ

so that
                                                              γ
                               z̄(k+1) − m(k+1) = −               (h̄(k) − g(k) ).
                                                           θ + µγ
Squaring and taking conditional expectation gives the result.

Lemma A.5 (Recursion of the optimization Lyapunov term). Define
                                                2       h                      i
                                                θ    µθ
            Fk := E[ f ( x̄ (k) )]− f ( x ∗ )+     +     E ∥Ek−1 [z̄(k) ]− x ∗ ∥2 .
                                                2γ 2

Then, for all k ≥ 0,
                                                
                                  L           µ                         µ
          Fk+1 ≤ (1 − θ ) Fk +      −(1 − θ )      E∥Πy(k) ∥2F −(1 − θ ) E∥ x̄ (k) − ȳ(k) ∥2
                                 2n           2n                        2
                     2     2
                                       
                    θ γσ        γL + 1
                 +                        .                                                                  (A.6)
                     2nR (θ + µγ)2

Moreover, using ∥Πy(k) ∥2F ≤ λΨk , one has

                                 Fk+1 ≤ (1 − θ ) Fk + aΨ Ψk − b∆ ∆k + D,                                     (A.7)

where
                       λ                                 (1 − θ ) µ
             aΨ :=       L −(1 − θ )µ ,          b∆ : =              ,        ∆k := E∥ x̄ (k) − ȳ(k) ∥2 ,
                       n                                      2
and                                                                    
                                               θ 2 γσ2         γL + 1
                                        D :=                              .
                                                2nR           (θ + µγ)2
ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-25                                             17


Proof. By average preservation of accelerated gossip,

                     ȳ(k) = (1 − θ ) x̄ (k) + θ z̄(k) ,       x̄ (k+1) = (1 − θ ) x̄ (k) + θ z̄(k+1) ,

so                                                                           
                                         x̄ (k+1) − ȳ(k) = θ z̄(k+1) − z̄(k) .
Applying the upper bound from Lemma A.3 at x = x̄ (k+1) and y = y(k) gives
                                                    *                                    +
                                                         n
                                                      1               k
                                                      n i∑
                                                                    (   )
               f ( x̄ (k+1) ) ≤ f (ȳ(k) ;y(k) )+ θ         ∇ f i (yi ), z̄(k+1) − z̄(k)
                                                         =1
                                           Lθ 2 (k+1) (k) 2 L
                                       +       ∥z̄   − z̄ ∥ + ∥Πy(k) ∥2F .                                     (A.8)
                                            2                2n
Insert x ∗ by splitting the inner product:

                                  z̄(k+1) − z̄(k) = ( x ∗ − z̄(k) )+(z̄(k+1) − x ∗ ).

Let
                                       1 n              (k)
                            g(k) : =     ∑
                                       n i =1
                                              ∇ f i ( y i ),       m(k+1) := Ek [z̄(k+1) ].

Taking conditional expectation in (A.8) and using Lemma A.4,

             Ek [ f ( x̄ (k+1) )] ≤ f (ȳ(k) ;y(k) )+ θ ⟨ g(k) ,x ∗ − z̄(k) ⟩+ θ ⟨ g(k) ,m(k+1) − x ∗ ⟩
                                       Lθ 2                      L              Lθ 2 γ2 σ2
                                   +        ∥m(k+1) − z̄(k) ∥2 + ∥Πy(k) ∥2F +               .                  (A.9)
                                        2                       2n            2(θ + µγ)2 nR

Next, use
                             θ ( x ∗ − z̄(k) ) = θ ( x ∗ − ȳ(k) )+(1 − θ )( x̄ (k) − ȳ(k) ).
Applying the lower bound of Lemma A.3 with x = x ∗ and x = x̄ (k) gives

                                                                    µθ (k)                     µθ
             f (ȳ(k) ;y(k) )+ θ ⟨ g(k) ,x ∗ − z̄(k) ⟩ ≤ θ f ( x ∗ )−    ∥ȳ − x ∗ ∥2 − ∥Πy(k) ∥2F
                                                                     2                         2n
                                                                                                       
                                                           +(1 − θ ) f ( x̄ (k) )− D f ( x̄ (k) ;y(k) ) .

Substituting this into (A.9) yields
                                                                                         µθ
      Ek [ f ( x̄ (k+1) )] ≤ (1 − θ ) f ( x̄ (k) )− D f ( x̄ (k) ;y(k) ) + θ f ( x ∗ )− ∥ȳ(k) − x ∗ ∥2
                                                                                          2
                                µθ                                                Lθ   2
                             − ∥Πy(k) ∥2F + θ ⟨ g(k) ,m(k+1) − x ∗ ⟩+                    ∥m(k+1) − z̄(k) ∥2   (A.10)
                                2n                                                   2
                                 L                     Lθ 2 γ2 σ2
                             + ∥Πy(k) ∥2F +                              .                                    (A.11)
                                2n                  2(θ + µγ)2 nR
18                                   ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-25


The averaged z-update identity implies
                                  θ
                            g(k) + (m(k+1) − z̄(k) )+ µ(m(k+1) − ȳ(k) ) = 0.
                                  γ
Hence
                                                     θ 2 ( k +1) ( k ) ( k +1)
                      θ ⟨ g(k) ,m(k+1) − x ∗ ⟩ = −      ⟨m      − z̄ ,m        − x∗ ⟩
                                                     γ
                                                − µθ ⟨m(k+1) − ȳ(k) ,m(k+1) − x ∗ ⟩.
Using
                            2⟨ a − b,a − c⟩ = ∥ a − b∥2 +∥ a − c∥2 −∥b − c∥2 ,
we obtain
                                   θ 2 (k)           θ2                 θ2
      θ ⟨ g(k) ,m(k+1) − x ∗ ⟩ =       ∥z̄ − x ∗ ∥2 − ∥m(k+1) − x ∗ ∥2 − ∥m(k+1) − z̄(k) ∥2
                                   2γ                2γ                 2γ
                                      µθ (k)           µθ                 µθ
                                   + ∥ȳ − x ∗ ∥2 − ∥m(k+1) − x ∗ ∥2 − ∥m(k+1) − ȳ(k) ∥2 .
                                      2                 2                  2
Substituting this into (A.11), canceling the ∥ȳ(k) − x ∗ ∥2 term, and discarding the nonposi-
tive term − 2 ∥m(k+1) − ȳ(k) ∥2 , we get
              µθ

                                           2      
                                            θ   µθ
         Ek [ f ( x̄ ( k +1)          ∗
                             )]− f ( x )+     +      ∥ m ( k +1) − x ∗ ∥ 2
                                           2γ 2
                                                                   2             
                                            θ 2 (k)       ∗ 2        θ      Lθ 2
                               (k)       ∗
         ≤ (1 − θ ) f ( x̄ )− f ( x ) + ∥z̄ − x ∥ −                        −        ∥m(k+1) − z̄(k) ∥2
                                              2γ                     2γ       2
                                                     
                                               L µθ                          Lθ 2 γ2 σ2
           −(1 − θ ) D f ( x̄ (k) ;y(k) )+       −      ∥Πy(k) ∥2F +                    .
                                              2n 2n                       2(θ + µγ)2 nR
Now use the lower bound from Lemma A.3:
                                            µ                   µ
                    D f ( x̄ (k) ;y(k) ) ≥ ∥ x̄ (k) − ȳ(k) ∥2 + ∥Πy(k) ∥2F .
                                             2                  2n
Then
                                                L
               −(1 − θ ) D f ( x̄ (k) ;y(k) )+ ∥Πy(k) ∥2F
                                               2n                     
                              µ (k)         (k) 2      L            µ
               ≤ −(1 − θ ) ∥ x̄ − ȳ ∥ +                  −(1 − θ )      ∥Πy(k) ∥2F .
                              2                       2n            2n
Finally, by Lemma A.4,
                                                                          γ2 σ 2
                       E∥z̄(k) − x ∗ ∥2 ≤ E∥Ek−1 [z̄(k) ]− x ∗ ∥2 +                .
                                                                      (θ + µγ)2 nR
Taking full expectation and collecting the two variance contributions gives (A.6). Replac-
ing ∥Πy(k) ∥2F by λΨk yields (A.7).
ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-25                                  19


A.4 Combined Lyapunov recursion and unrolling
Lemma A.6 (Combined Lyapunov recursion). Let

                             Φk := Fk + uΨk ,       ∆k := E∥ x̄ (k) − ȳ(k) ∥2 .

Set
                                    λ                            (1 − θ ) µ
                            aΨ :=     L −(1 − θ )µ ,         b∆ : =          ,
                                    n                                  2
        3ρ2      144L2 λρ4 (1 + ρ2 )γ2               72nL2 ρ4 (1 + ρ2 )γ2              144nLρ4 (1 + ρ2 )γ2
qΨ :=        2
               +              2  3
                                        ,      c∆ :=            2 3
                                                                          ,     c F :=                     ,
      1 + 2ρ            (1 − ρ )                         (1 − ρ )                            (1 − ρ2 )3
                                                                                        
                        e   24ρ4 (1 + ρ2 )γ2 (n − 1)σ2             θ 2 γσ2     γL + 1
               C := c F G +                            ,     D :=                          .
                                   (1 − ρ2 )3 R                     2nR (θ + µγ)2
Assume                                                                       
                               θ                  [ aΨ ]+              θ b∆
                       δ := 1 − − qΨ > 0,                 ≤ u ≤ min       ,     .
                               2                     δ                2c F c∆
Then, for all k ≥ 0,                              
                                                 θ
                                    Φ k +1 ≤ 1 −     Φk + uC + D.
                                                 2
Proof. From Lemma A.5,

                                Fk+1 ≤ (1 − θ ) Fk + aΨ Ψk − b∆ ∆k + D.

From Lemma A.2 and the fact that E[ f ( x̄ (k) )− f ∗ ] ≤ Fk ,

                                    Ψk+1 ≤ qΨ Ψk + c∆ ∆k + c F Fk + C.

Multiply the second inequality by u and add it to the first one. This yields

                Φk+1 ≤ (1 − θ + uc F ) Fk +( aΨ + uqΨ )Ψk +(uc∆ − b∆ )∆k + uC + D.

Now the upper bound u ≤ θ/(2c F ) implies
                                                               
                                                              θ
                                     (1 − θ + uc F ) Fk ≤ 1 −     F.
                                                              2 k

Next, by the definition of δ and the lower bound u ≥ [ aΨ ]+ /δ,
                                                     
                                                    θ
                                   aΨ + uqΨ ≤ u 1 −     ,
                                                    2
so                                                        
                                                         θ
                                    ( aΨ + uqΨ )Ψk ≤ 1 −     uΨk .
                                                         2
20                               ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-25


Finally, the upper bound u ≤ b∆ /c∆ gives uc∆ − b∆ ≤ 0, so the ∆k term is nonpositive and
may be dropped. Therefore,
                                                          
                            θ                             θ
               Φ k +1 ≤ 1 −     Fk + uΨk + uC + D = 1 −        Φk + uC + D.
                            2                              2


Proposition A.1 (Feasibility of the interval for u). Assume ρ < 1. Then there exists γ̄( R) > 0
such that for every 0 < γ ≤ γ̄( R) one has δ > 0 and the interval
                                                               
                                    [ aΨ ]+              θ b∆
                                            ≤ u ≤ min       ,
                                       δ                2c F c∆
is nonempty.
Proof. For fixed R with ρ < 1, the quantity
                                                              
                                                   (1 − ρ2 )2
                             λ = max 2(1 − θ )2 , 2
                                                 2ρ (1 + 2ρ2 )
                                       p
remains bounded as γ ↓ 0, because θ = µγ/2 → 0. Hence

                           3ρ2                         θ       1 − ρ2
                  qΨ =           + O ( γ2 ),    δ = 1 − − qΨ =         + o (1).
                         1 + 2ρ2                       2       1 + 2ρ2

Since ρ < 1, we have (1 − ρ2 )/(1 + 2ρ2 ) > 0, and therefore δ > 0 for all sufficiently small
γ > 0. Also,
                                     λ              
                                aΨ = L −(1 − θ )µ = O(1),
                                     n
so the lower endpoint [ aΨ ]+ /δ stays bounded. On the other hand,

                            θ       (1 − ρ2 )3
                               =                    θ ≍ γ−3/2 → +∞,
                           2c F 288nLρ4 (1 + ρ2 )γ2
while
                             b∆   (1 − θ ) µ (1 − ρ2 )3
                                =                       ≍ γ−2 → +∞.
                             c∆ 144nL2 ρ4 (1 + ρ2 )γ2
Thus the right endpoint diverges to +∞ whereas the left endpoint remains bounded, so
the interval is nonempty for all sufficiently small γ.

Corollary A.1 (Unrolled Lyapunov bound). Assume the conditions of Lemma A.6, and let u
satisfy the stated interval condition. Then, for every k ≥ 0,
                                                              !
                                       θ k       2            θ k
                           Φk ≤ 1 −        Φ0 +      1− 1−          N R,γ ,
                                       2         θ            2
ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-25                                                  21


where
                                                                                                                     !
           144nLρ4 (1 + ρ2 )γ2 e 24ρ4 (1 + ρ2 )γ2 (n − 1)σ2     µγ2 σ2                                    γL + 1
N R,γ := u           2  3
                              G +              2 3
                                                              +                                         p                  .
               (1 − ρ )                 (1 − ρ ) R               4nR                                   ( µγ/2 + µγ)2

In particular,
                                                              k
                                                  θ                     2
                                         Φk ≤ 1 −                   Φ0 + N R,γ .
                                                  2                     θ
Proof. Iterating the one-step recursion from Lemma A.6 gives
                                             k           k −1              k −1− t
                                   θ                                     θ
                          Φk ≤ 1 −                 Φ0 + ∑             1−                 (uC + D ).
                                   2                       t =0          2

Since uC + D does not depend on t, the geometric-series identity yields
                k                     k                                  k                  !
           θ               1 − 1 − 2θ                   θ                              2       θ k
  Φk ≤ 1 −            Φ0 +             (uC + D ) = 1 −                           Φ0 +   1− 1−       (uC + D ).
           2               1 − 1 − 2θ                   2                              θ       2

Substituting the definitions of C and D shows that uC + D = N R,γ .

A.5 Explicit admissible parameters and the final rate
Theorem A.1 (Detailed convergence bound in the notation of the supplied proof). Assume
the conditions of Proposition A.1, and choose u > 0 satisfying the interval condition in Lemma A.6.
Then, for every k ≥ 0,
                                                  
                                                 θ k         2
                                Fk ≤ Φk ≤ 1 −         Φ0 + N R,γ ,
                                                 2           θ
where                                  r
                                             µγ                   √           p
                                  θ=            ,          ρ=         2(1 −        1 − β) R .
                                              2
Consequently,
                                                                            k
                                      (k)             ∗
                                                             θ                       2
                            E f ( x̄         )− f ( x ) ≤ 1 −                     Φ0 + N R,γ .
                                                              2                       θ
Proof. Since Φk = Fk + uΨk and uΨk ≥ 0, one has Fk ≤ Φk . The claim therefore follows
directly from Corollary A.1 and the definition of Fk .

Theorem A.2 (Explicit admissible choice of (γ,R)). Assume Assumptions 1–4. Let
                                                  r
                              1                       µγ                             p                µγ
                  0<γ≤          ,            θ=          ,            ρ2 = 2(1 −         1 − β)2R ≤      .
                             8L                        2                                               4
22                                      ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-25


Let
                                               ∆ x : = ∥ x (0) − x ∗ ∥ 2 .
Then the interval for u in Lemma A.6 is nonempty. Moreover, with the choice
                                                             aΨ
                                                      u :=      ,
                                                              δ
for every k ≥ 0 one has
                                             k                            √   r
                  (k)         ∗
                                         θ               192 e n − 1 2 9 2 σ2 γ
        E f ( x̄         )− f ( x ) ≤ 1 −          L∆ x +     θ G+      σ +        .                  (A.12)
                                          2               119      6nLR     8 nR µ

Proof. By the assumptions on γ and R,
                                                     µγ    µ  1
                                              ρ2 ≤      ≤    ≤ .
                                                      4   32L 32
Hence
                                                       (1 − ρ2 )2
                                                λ=                  ,
                                                     2ρ2 (1 + 2ρ2 )
because for ρ2 ≤ 1/32 the second term in the definition of λ dominates 2(1 − θ )2 . Using

                                             1 + ρ2        33                      1
                                                          ≤ ,                γ≤      ,
                                       (1 + 2ρ2 )(1 − ρ2 ) 31                     8L
we obtain
                                  3ρ2    72L2 γ2 ρ2 (1 + ρ2 )
                            qΨ =       +
                                1 + 2ρ2 (1 + 2ρ2 )(1 − ρ2 )
                                      9 33             6      21 21  21
                              ≤ 3ρ2 + · ρ2 < 3ρ2 + ρ2 = ρ2 ≤ µγ ≤       .
                                      8 31             5      5  20 160
Therefore,
                                   θ             1 21     119
                           δ = 1 − − qΨ ≥ 1 − −         =     .
                                   2             8 160 160
Choose u = aΨ /δ. Since aΨ ≥ 0, this satisfies the lower bound. We verify the two upper
bounds. First,
                                   ρ4 (1 + ρ2 ) γ2                
              2c F aΨ = 288L                2  3
                                                   λ L −(1 − θ )µ
                                     (1 − ρ )
                                            ρ2 (1 + ρ2 )     144 33 2 12 2 3  6
                           ≤ 144L2 γ2                      ≤    · ρ < ρ ≤ µγ = θ 2 .
                                        (1 + 2ρ2 )(1 − ρ2 ) 64 31     5    5  5
Combining this with δ ≥ 119/160 and θ ≤ 1/4 gives
                                                     6      3
                                            2c F aΨ ≤ θ 2 ≤ θ ≤ θδ,
                                                     5     10
ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., x (20xx), pp. 1-25                       23


which proves u ≤ θ/(2c F ). Second,

                           ρ4 (1 + ρ2 ) γ2                
            c∆ aΨ = 72L2            2  3
                                           λ L −(1 − θ )µ
                             (1 − ρ )
                                  ρ2 (1 + ρ2 )    36 33   3     3      3µ
                  ≤ 36L3 γ2                      ≤ · Lρ2 < Lρ2 ≤ µγL ≤     .
                              (1 + 2ρ2 )(1 − ρ2 ) 64 31   5     20     160
On the other hand,
                                      (1 − θ ) µ    3µ 119 3µ
                                 b∆ δ =          δ≥    ·    >  .
                                          2          8 160 160
Hence c∆ aΨ ≤ b∆ δ, that is, u ≤ b∆ /c∆ . Thus u is feasible.
  Now apply Theorem A.1. Since u = aΨ /δ,

                               2                        2
                                      e = 2c F aΨ G
                                 uc F G           e≤ 6 θ Ge ≤ 192 θ e
                                                                   G.
                               θ            θδ       5 δ      119
For the stochastic term carried by C, using u ≤ θ/(2c F ) yields

                              2 24ρ4 (1 + ρ2 )γ2 (n − 1)σ2   n−1 2
                                u             2 3
                                                           ≤      σ .
                              θ        (1 − ρ ) R            6nLR
For the term D,
                                                     
                     2    σ2 µγ2           γL + 1
                       D=
                     θ    nR 2θ           (θ + µγ)2
                                                              √    r
                            σ2 µγ2 γL + 1 σ2 γ               9 2 σ2 γ
                          ≤              =      ( γL + 1 ) ≤          ,
                            nR 2θ θ 2      nR θ               8 nR µ

where we used θ 2 = µγ/2 and γL ≤ 1/8. It remains to control the initial term. Since the
initialization is
                                 (0)   (0)   (0)
                                xi = yi = zi = 0,
we have Πx (0) = Πz(0) = 0, hence Ψ0 = 0 and Φ0 = F0 . By L-smoothness of f and ∇ f ( x ∗ )= 0,
                                                      L                  L
                              f ( x (0) )− f ( x ∗ ) ≤ ∥ x (0) − x ∗ ∥2 = ∆ x .
                                                      2                  2
Also,
                                 θ 2 µθ µ µθ µ µ 3L
                                    + = + ≤ + ≤ ,
                                 2γ 2   4 2  4 8  8
because θ ≤ 1/4 and µ ≤ L. Therefore,
                                        
                                     1 3         7
                         Φ0 = F0 ≤    +    L∆ x = L∆ x ≤ L∆ x .
                                     2 8         8
Substituting these estimates into Theorem A.1 proves (A.12).
24                                                                                 REFERENCES


Translation back to the paper notation. The detailed proof above follows the supplied
                                                                 e = (nL)−1 ∑i ∥∇ f i ( x ∗ )∥2 .
file and is therefore written in terms of the auxiliary quantity G
The paper itself reserves the notation G for the heterogeneity measure f ∗ − n1 ∑i f i∗ . By
                                          ∗

Lemma A.1,
                                          e ≤ 2G ∗ .
                                          G
Hence the entire proof can be restated in the paper notation without changing the argu-
ment structure; and in the homogeneous-optimum regime G ∗ = 0, the auxiliary term G    e
also vanishes, so the communication-complexity corollary stated in the main text follows
exactly from the same proof chain.


References
 [1] A. Author and B. Coauthor. A representative work on decentralized optimization
     over time-varying graphs. To be completed, 20XX. Placeholder entry; replace with the
     specific reference you intend to cite.

 [2] Romain Berthier, Sébastien Bubeck, and Yin Tat Lee. Accelerated gossip in networks
     using polynomial filtering. SIAM Journal on Optimization, 2020.

 [3] Y. Chen, Y. Ouyang, and H. Xu. Optimal accelerated algorithms for distributed op-
     timization. To be completed, 2021. Placeholder; fill in with the exact paper if different.

 [4] Dusan Jakovetić, João Xavier, and José M. F. Moura. Fast distributed gradient meth-
     ods. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 59(5):1131–1146, 2014.

 [5] Xiangru Lian, Ce Zhang, Huan Zhang, Cho-Jui Hsieh, Wei Zhang, and Ji Liu. Can
     decentralized algorithms outperform centralized algorithms? a case study for de-
     centralized parallel stochastic gradient descent. In Advances in Neural Information
     Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2017.

 [6] Angelia Nedić, Alex Olshevsky, Wei Shi, and César A. Uribe. Distributed opti-
     mization over time-varying directed graphs. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control,
     59(11):3270–3285, 2014.

 [7] Angelia Nedić, Alex Olshevsky, Wei Shi, and César A. Uribe. Achieving geometric
     convergence for distributed optimization over time-varying graphs. SIAM Journal
     on Optimization, 27(4):2597–2633, 2017.

 [8] Yurii Nesterov. Lectures on convex optimization: Chapter on optimization over
     networks. Manuscript, 2018. Preprint.

 [9] Alex Olshevsky and John N. Tsitsiklis. Linear time average consensus on fixed
     graphs and implications for decentralized optimization and multi-agent control.
     IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 59(9):2227–2240, 2014.
REFERENCES                                                                              25


[10] Shi Pu, Angelia Nedić, and Alex Olshevsky. Distributed stochastic gradient tracking
     methods. Mathematical Programming, 2021.

[11] Guannan Qu and Na Li. Harnessing smoothness to accelerate distributed optimiza-
     tion. IEEE Transactions on Control of Network Systems, 5(3):1245–1260, 2018.

[12] Kevin Scaman, Francis Bach, Sébastien Bubeck, Yin Tat Lee, and Laurent Massoulié.
     Optimal algorithms for non-smooth distributed optimization in networks. In Ad-
     vances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2017.

[13] Wei Shi, Qing Ling, Gang Wu, and Wotao Yin. EXTRA: An exact first-order al-
     gorithm for decentralized consensus optimization. SIAM Journal on Optimization,
     25(2):944–966, 2015.

[14] Sebastian U. Stich. Local SGD converges fast and communicates little. In Interna-
     tional Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2019.

[15] Ran Xin and Usman A. Khan. A general framework for decentralized optimization
     with gradient tracking. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, 68:734–748, 2020.

[16] Jinming Xu, S. Zhu, and W. Yin. Augmented lagrangian-based gradient methods
     for distributed optimization. To be completed, 2015. Placeholder; adjust to the exact
     paper you have in mind.

[17] Kun Yuan, Qing Ling, and Wotao Yin. On the convergence of decentralized gradient
     descent. SIAM Journal on Optimization, 26(3):1835–1854, 2016.

[18] Kun Yuan, Bicheng Ying, and Ali H. Sayed. Exact diffusion for distributed opti-
     mization and learning–part i: Algorithm development. IEEE Transactions on Signal
     Processing, 67(3):708–723, 2019.
CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math.                                                Vol. 1, No. 1, pp. 1-27
doi:                                                                    March 2026




A Retraction-Free EXTRA Method for Decentralized
Optimization on the Stiefel Manifold
ReasFlow Paper Copilot


          Abstract. Decentralized optimization provides a fundamental framework for large-
          scale learning and signal processing with distributed data. We study decentralized
          optimization with orthogonality constraints on the Stiefel manifold and propose RF-
          EXTRA, a distributed retraction-free primal-dual method on static undirected net-
          works. The method combines an approximate gradient mapping for orthogonality-
          constrained optimization with an EXTRA-based decentralized recursion, thereby
          avoiding explicit retractions while preserving a simple communication pattern. On
          the theoretical side, the analysis considers both the averaged iterate and the joint er-
          ror (Xk − Xk ,sk − sk ), and establishes a contractive recursion for the joint error under
          an equivalent norm. This recursion is then used to compare the different terms in
          the descent lemma and finally derive an exact O(1/K ) convergence rate for the aver-
          aged iterate under explicit parameter conditions. Experiments on PCA and low-rank
          matrix completion show that RF-EXTRA compares favorably with the reported decen-
          tralized baselines and exhibits strong communication efficiency on the tested tasks on
          the Stiefel manifold.
AMS subject classifications: 65K10, 90C30, 49M37, 68W15
Key words: decentralized optimization, Stiefel manifold, retraction-free method, EXTRA, non-
convex optimization



1 Introduction
Decentralized optimization [1, 2] studies how a network of agents cooperatively solves a
global problem using local data and local communication. It has become a fundamental
framework in large-scale learning [3], signal processing [4, 5], and control [1], where data
are naturally distributed and centralized aggregation is either costly or undesirable. In
its classical Euclidean form, the goal is to combine computational scalability with com-
munication efficiency while preserving the solution quality of the underlying centralized
model.
    Many decentralized problems are not purely Euclidean. In distributed principal com-
ponent analysis, subspace estimation, and related matrix-learning tasks, the decision



http://www.global-sci.org/csiam-am                    1                   ©2026 Global-Science Press
2                             ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 1 (2026), pp. 1-27


variable is required to have orthonormal columns, and the optimization therefore takes
place on the Stiefel manifold

                             St(d,r ) = { X ∈ Rd×r : X ⊤ X = Ir }.

Such orthogonality constraints also arise in deep models with orthogonal layers [6], nor-
malization mechanisms [7], and low-rank fine-tuning schemes [8]. Accordingly, decen-
tralized optimization on the Stiefel manifold has become an important problem in decen-
tralized learning and matrix optimization.
    A central difficulty is that decentralized primal-dual correction mechanisms and man-
ifold feasibility mechanisms are driven by different principles. Methods in the EXTRA
family are analyzed as primal-dual type recursions, whereas manifold methods typically
rely on tangent projections and retractions to preserve feasibility. Once EXTRA is brought
into a nonconvex problem on the Stiefel manifold, combining these two ingredients is es-
sentially equivalent to analyzing a primal-dual algorithm together with nonconvex man-
ifold constraints and geometry in a single recursion. The convergence analysis is hence
highly nontrivial.
    This paper studies the consensus-constrained optimization problem on the Stiefel
manifold
                                                   1 n
                                     min F ( X ) := ∑ f i ( X ),
                                   X ∈St(d,r )     n i =1
where each agent i ∈ {1,...,n} has access only to its local smooth objective f i and commu-
nicates over a fixed connected undirected graph. Our aim is to develop a decentralized
method that preserves the correction mechanism of EXTRA while using a retraction-free
update on the Stiefel manifold. This direction is algorithmically attractive because mod-
ern GPUs are highly optimized for basic linear algebra subprograms (BLAS) [9], whereas
retraction operations such as repeated QR or polar orthogonalization are typically less
GPU-friendly than simple matrix multiplications and additions.

1.1   Related Work
1.1.1 Primal methods and primal-dual methods in decentralized optimization
The development of decentralized optimization began with primal methods such as de-
centralized gradient descent (DGD) [2] and decentralized SGD type variants for stochas-
tic objectives [10, 11], which established the basic consensus optimization framework but
generally suffer from steady state bias under constant stepsizes. To remove that bias, later
primal-dual or correction based methods introduced auxiliary states that couple consen-
sus and optimization more tightly. Representative milestones include gradient tracking
and DGT type methods [12–14], EXTRA [4], exact diffusion [5], NIDS [15], and prox-
PDA [16]. These methods clarified how exactness can be preserved over static networks
while maintaining low per-iteration communication cost.
ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 1 (2026), pp. 1-27                        3


    The surrounding Euclidean literature further expanded this line through refined anal-
yses for heterogeneous and nonconvex settings [3, 17, 18], compressed communication
[19–23], time varying and directed networks [24, 25], local step variants [26], and graph
design viewpoints [27]. These Euclidean results provide the algorithmic backbone for
our method, since RF-EXTRA keeps EXTRA itself while adapting it to optimization on
the Stiefel manifold.

1.1.2   Distributed optimization on the Stiefel manifold
For orthogonality-constrained problems, decentralized Riemannian methods form the
natural baseline. DRSGD [28] studies decentralized Riemannian gradient descent on the
Stiefel manifold and shows that distributed PCA type tasks can be handled directly in
the manifold setting. More recently, DPRGD [29] and DPRGT [30] study projected de-
centralized Riemannian gradient updates and decentralized proximal gradient tracking
on Riemannian manifolds, respectively; together they provide our main projection based
and tracking based baselines. Riemannian EXTRA (REXTRA) [31] further demonstrates
that EXTRA type primal-dual correction can be extended from Euclidean space to com-
pact submanifolds, but still through retraction or projection based updates.
    Related works further considered quantization and compression [32, 33], stochastic
recursive momentum [34], conjugate gradient and natural gradient directions [35, 36],
local linear consensus behavior on the Stiefel manifold [37], manifold consensus formu-
lations [38,39], and decentralized retraction-free optimization on the Stiefel manifold [40].
However, an EXTRA type correction method in this retraction-free regime is still unavail-
able.

1.1.3   Retraction-free optimization with orthogonality constraints
A separate line of work studies orthogonality-constrained optimization without perform-
ing explicit retractions at every iteration. DESTINY [41] introduced an approximate
gradient mapping for orthogonality-constrained optimization through an approximate
augmented Lagrangian formulation on the Stiefel manifold, where orthogonality is con-
trolled by a penalty-based surrogate instead of being enforced by explicit retractions at
every step. Early centralized retraction-free methods also showed that one can reduce the
cost of repeated QR or polar decompositions while still controlling feasibility drift [42,43].
This perspective is particularly attractive for large matrix problems, where orthogonal-
ization can dominate the local computational budget.
    More recent developments include infeasible methods with local linear convergence
guarantees [44], ambient-space reformulations that dissolve hard constraints into smooth
penalty structures [45], and preconditioned schemes motivated by LoRA type large-
model fine-tuning [8]. Related applications in orthogonal weight normalization and
multi-Stiefel learning further illustrate the practical importance of low-cost updates for
orthogonality-constrained problems [6, 7]. The present work draws on this line to con-
struct the local geometric step, and it combines that step with the decentralized EXTRA
correction mechanism discussed above.
4                                ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 1 (2026), pp. 1-27


1.2     Contribution and Organization
This paper combines decentralized primal-dual correction, distributed optimization on
the Stiefel manifold, and retraction-free orthogonality control in a single scheme. The
key idea is to embed an approximate gradient mapping for orthogonality-constrained
optimization into an EXTRA recursion.
   Our contributions are summarized as follows.

      • We design and implement RF-EXTRA, a distributed retraction-free EXTRA al-
        gorithm that combines an approximate gradient mapping for orthogonality-
        constrained optimization with an EXTRA-based decentralized recursion on the
        Stiefel manifold, and we validate this design through a systematic numerical study
        on PCA and LRMC over the Stiefel manifold.

      • On the theory side, we show that the joint-error variables (Xk − Xk ,sk − sk ) remain
        in a controllable region and satisfy a contractive recursion under an equivalent
        norm. This allows us to establish a summed joint-error bound, compare the dif-
        ferent terms in the descent analysis of the original objective function, and finally
        derive an exact O(1/K ) convergence rate under a constant stepsize. In contrast
        to existing retraction-based EXTRA-type methods such as REXTRA [31] and exist-
        ing retraction-free schemes without EXTRA correction, our analysis must couple
        retraction-free feasibility control with an EXTRA-type inexact primal-dual recur-
        sion; this combination is nontrivial because of the manifold nonconvexity, espe-
        cially under a constant stepsize, as also noted in [31].

    This article is organized as follows. Section 2 presents RF-EXTRA together with
the approximate gradient mapping for orthogonality-constrained optimization. Sec-
tion 3 first states the standing assumptions and the averaged-sequence ingredients in
Lemma 3.1, then introduces the equivalent-norm lemma and the joint-error recursion,
next proves neighborhood propagation in Lemma 3.4, and finally establishes the exact
O(1/K ) convergence theorem.

1.3     Notation
Throughout the theoretical development, we use n for the number of agents and X ∈ Rd×r
for the matrix variable on the Stiefel manifold. We write
                                  ⊤         ⊤ ⊤                ⊤
                          Xk = [ X1,k ,...,Xn,k ] ,     sk = [s1,k ,...,s⊤
                                                                         n,k ]
                                                                               ⊤


for the stacked primal and auxiliary variables, and

                                         1 n                     1 n
                                         n i∑                    n i∑
                                X̄k :=         Xi,k ,   s̄k :=         si,k
                                            =1                      =1
ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 1 (2026), pp. 1-27                        5


for their averages. The consensus projector is

                                                1
                                            J := 1n 1⊤
                                                     n ⊗ Id ,
                                                n
and we use
                              Xk := (1n ⊗ Id ) X̄k ,       sk := (1n ⊗ Id )s̄k .
We also use the lifted mixing matrices

                                   W := W ⊗ Id ,           V := V ⊗ Id ,

so the stacked block recursions are written directly in terms of W and V. The stacked
Euclidean gradients are denoted by

                              ∇f(X) := [∇ f 1 ( X1 )⊤ ,..., ∇ f n ( Xn )⊤ ]⊤ .

The joint error is defined by                      "             #
                                                       Xk − Xk
                                           pk :=                     .
                                                       sk − sk
Finally, ∥·∥ F denotes the Frobenius norm.


2 A Retraction-Free EXTRA Method for Decentralized Opti-
  mization
We consider the decentralized optimization problem on the Stiefel manifold introduced
in Section 1. Each agent i ∈ {1,...,n} stores a local variable Xi,k ∈ Rd×r and has access only
to its local objective f i . Let W ∈ Rn×n be a symmetric doubly stochastic mixing matrix
associated with a connected undirected graph, and let

                               V = θ In +(1 − θ )W,              θ ∈ (0,1/2].

We use the lifted mixing matrices W and V introduced in the notation section. Our con-
struction starts from the Euclidean correction philosophy of EXTRA and then replaces
the Euclidean gradient with a surrogate compatible with the geometry of the Stiefel man-
ifold.
    For unconstrained consensus optimization, EXTRA corrects the steady state bias of
decentralized gradient descent by coupling the primal recursion with a memory term.
An equivalent two-state representation of the Euclidean mechanism can be written as

                                           Xk+1 = WXk + sk ,                             (2.1)
                                                                                   
                        sk+1 = sk +(W − V)Xk − α ∇f(Xk+1 )−∇f(Xk ) ,                     (2.2)
6                                 ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 1 (2026), pp. 1-27


where ∇f(Xk ) is defined in the notation section. This representation makes the role of
the auxiliary state explicit: the matrix W − V handles the consensus correction, while the
gradient difference drives descent without introducing a persistent bias under hetero-
geneity [4, 5]. Our goal is to retain this correction architecture in the setting of the Stiefel
manifold.
    To this end, we replace the Euclidean gradient by an approximate gradient mapping
for orthogonality-constrained optimization [41]. For each agent, define
                                  Hi ( X ) = Gi ( X )+ βX ( X ⊤ X − Ir ),
where
                                     3Ir − X ⊤ X                             
                Gi ( X ) = ∇ f i ( XX ⊤ X )      − X sym X ⊤ ∇ f i ( XX ⊤ X ) .
                                          2
The first term provides an ambient descent surrogate tailored to the geometry of the
Stiefel manifold, while the penalty term controls orthogonality violation. This construc-
tion allows the geometric information to enter through a local map Hi without changing
the linear communication structure of EXTRA. For the averaged analysis, we also use the
corresponding global map
                                  H ( X ) = G ( X )+ βX ( X ⊤ X − Ir ),
where G is defined from f := n−1 ∑in=1 f i in the same way as Gi is defined from f i . After
introducing the algorithm, we write
                                                                          1 n
                                                                          n i∑
                 Hk := [ H1 ( X1,k )⊤ ,..., Hn ( Xn,k )⊤ ]⊤ ,    H̄k :=         Hi ( Xi,k ).
                                                                             =1

    The resulting algorithm, called RF-EXTRA, is stated in Algorithm 1. The initialization
follows the EXTRA mechanism and uses the local map Hi evaluated at the initial point.
    In stacked form, Algorithm 1 reads
                                           Xk+1 = WXk + sk ,                                      (2.3)
                              sk+1 = sk +(W − V)Xk − α(Hk+1 − Hk ).                               (2.4)
Averaging (2.3)–(2.4) and using the doubly stochasticity of W and V yields
                                 s̄k = −α H̄k ,      X̄k+1 = X̄k − α H̄k .
This averaged recursion is the key link between RF-EXTRA and the descent analysis de-
veloped in Section 3.
    RF-EXTRA has two main advantages. First, it preserves the EXTRA mechanism, so
the communication layer remains linear and fully decentralized. Second, it avoids ex-
plicit retractions at every iteration. Each step requires one neighbor mixing update for Xk ,
one evaluation of the local surrogate map Hi , and one auxiliary correction update for sk .
Consequently, the method replaces repeated orthogonalization with a cheaper ambient-
space computation while still maintaining effective control of feasibility and consensus
through the penalty term and the correction state.
ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 1 (2026), pp. 1-27                           7


Algorithm 1 RF-EXTRA
Require: Mixing matrix W, correction matrix V = θ In +(1 − θ )W with θ ∈(0,1/2], stepsize
    α > 0, penalty parameter β > 0, initial matrices Xi,0 ∈ Rd×r for i = 1,...,n
 1: for each agent i = 1,...,n do
 2:     Compute Hi ( Xi,0 )
 3:     Set si,0 = −αHi ( Xi,0 )
 4: end for
 5: for k = 0,1,2,... do
 6:     for each agent i = 1,...,n in parallel do
 7:         Exchange X j,k with neighbors j
 8:         Update the primal variable:
                                                      n
                                            Xi,k+1 = ∑ wij X j,k + si,k
                                                     j =1

 9:         Compute Hi ( Xi,k+1 )
10:         Update the auxiliary variable:
                                      n                                                     
                      si,k+1 = si,k + ∑ (wij − vij ) X j,k − α Hi ( Xi,k+1 )− Hi ( Xi,k )
                                     j =1

11:     end for
12: end for


3 Convergence Analysis
This section establishes convergence of the averaged RF-EXTRA iterate. The analysis
combines two ingredients: descent properties inherited from the centralized surrogate
analysis on the Stiefel manifold and a contractive recursion for the joint error. The latter
is handled in an S-norm, which is essential for the EXTRA subsystem.

3.1   Standing assumptions
Before stating the assumptions, we collect the constants used throughout the analysis.
Let
                      1
             b( X ) := ∥ X ⊤ X − Ir ∥2F , R := { X ∈ Rd×r : ∥ X ⊤ X − Ir ∥ F ≤ 1/6},
                      4
and define the explicit bounded set
                                                        √
                             B := { X ∈ Rd×r : ∥ X ∥ F ≤ 7r/6 + 1}.
8                                     ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 1 (2026), pp. 1-27


We use L f for a Lipschitz constant of ∇ f on { XX ⊤ X : X ∈ B}, and we define

                               ∥ G ( X )− G (Y )∥ F                        ∥∇b( X )−∇b(Y )∥ F
               L g := sup                           ,       Lb := sup                         ,
                      X ̸=Y ∈B      ∥X − Y∥F                      X ̸=Y ∈B     ∥X − Y∥F

                         Mg := sup ∥ G ( X )∥ F ,         C0 := sup ∥∇ f ( XX ⊤ X )∥ F ,
                                 X ∈R                            X ∈R

and the shorthand
                               L H := L g + βLb ,         M H := sup ∥ H ( X )∥ F .
                                                                  X ∈R

      We collect the assumptions used in the convergence analysis.

Assumption 1 (Smooth local models). Each local objective f i is smooth, and the constants
L f , L g , Lb , Mg , C0 , L H , and M H defined above are finite on the indicated sets.

Assumption 2 (Network). The mixing matrix W is symmetric and doubly stochastic,
the communication graph is connected, and the second largest singular value satisfies
σ2 (W ) < 1.

3.2     Averaged-sequence ingredients
The next lemma records the two properties imported from the centralized analysis: coer-
civity of the surrogate map on the neighborhood of interest and one-step propagation of
the averaged iterate inside that neighborhood.

Lemma 3.1 (Averaged neighborhood preservation). If

                                                        6 + 21C0
                                                 β≥              ,
                                                            5
then, for every X ∈ R,
                                 ∥ H ( X )∥2F ≥ ∥ G ( X )∥2F + β∥ X ⊤ X − Ir ∥2F .                    (3.1)
Moreover, if
                                              √                                              
                                                  n                                 1    1    1
           X̄k ∈ R,        ∥Xk − Xk ∥ F ≤ min 1,    ,                α ≤ min           ,    ,     ,
                                                 LH                                4L H 4βLb 4β

and                                                √        
                                             β ≥ 12 2 Mg + 1 ,
then
                                                    X̄k+1 ∈ R.
ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 1 (2026), pp. 1-27                                  9


Proof. The coercivity estimate (3.1) is exactly the statement of DESTINY Lemma 2 for the
same pointwise map
                              H ( X ) = G ( X )+ βX ( X ⊤ X − Ir )
on the same region R; hence it may be cited directly.
    For the second claim, let
                                                                        1
                            Q( X ) := X ⊤ X − Ir ,             b( X ) := ∥ Q( X )∥2F .
                                                                        4
Then ∇b( X ) = XQ( X ). As before, if
                                                  1
                                              J := 1n 1⊤
                                                       n ⊗ Id ,
                                                  n
then JW = J, JV = J, and J (W − V) = 0. Applying J to the auxiliary recursion gives

                                      Jsk+1 = Jsk − αJ (Hk+1 − Hk ).

Because si,0 = −αHi ( Xi,0 ), averaging yields s̄0 = −α H̄0 , and induction gives

                                       s̄k = −α H̄k            for all k ≥ 0.

Applying J to the primal recursion,

                                             Xk+1 = WXk + sk ,

and using JW = J, we obtain

                                       X̄k+1 = X̄k + s̄k = X̄k − α H̄k .

Now define
                                       ξ k := H ( X̄k )− H̄k − G ( X̄k ).
Since H ( X̄k ) = G ( X̄k )+ β∇b( X̄k ), the averaged recursion becomes

                                     X̄k+1 = X̄k − αβ∇b( X̄k )+ αξ k .                              (3.2)

Moreover,
                           ∥ Xi,k − X̄k ∥ F ≤ ∥Xk − Xk ∥ F ≤ 1,              i = 1,...,n.
Since X̄k ∈ R, we have ∥ X̄k⊤ X̄k − Ir ∥ F ≤ 1/6, and hence
                                                                                            √
                                                          √                                  r 7r
                 ∥ X̄k ∥2F = tr( X̄k⊤ X̄k ) ≤ tr( Ir )+       r ∥ X̄k⊤ X̄k − Ir ∥ F ≤ r +     ≤ .
                                                                                            6  6
                     √
Therefore ∥ X̄k ∥ F ≤ 7r/6, hence Xi,k ∈ B for all i. Therefore Hi is L H -Lipschitz at the
points used below, and
                                                              L
            ∥ξ k ∥ F ≤ ∥ H ( X̄k )− H̄k ∥ F +∥ G ( X̄k )∥ F ≤ √H ∥Xk − Xk ∥ F + Mg ≤ 1 + Mg .       (3.3)
                                                                n
10                                  ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 1 (2026), pp. 1-27


Because X̄k ∈ R, we have ∥ Q( X̄k )∥ F ≤ 1/6, so every eigenvalue of X̄k⊤ X̄k lies in [5/6,7/6].
We now estimate the feasibility of X̄k+1 directly through the singular values of X̄k . Let
                              t := αβ,       X̄k = UΣV ⊤ ,        q j := σj2 − 1,
where Σ = diag(σj ). Since X̄k ∈ R, we have |q j | ≤ 1/6. Define the penalty-only point
                                           Zk := X̄k − t∇b( X̄k ).
Using ∇b( X̄k ) = UΣ(Σ2 − Ir )V ⊤ , we have
                                                               
                                      Zk = Udiag σj (1 − tq j ) V ⊤ .
Therefore                                                                  2
                        ∥ Zk⊤ Zk − Ir ∥2F = ∑ (1 + q j )(1 − tq j )2 − 1
                                             j
                                                                                       2
                                         = ∑ q2j 1 − 2t(1 + q j )+ t2 q j (1 + q j )
                                             j
                                                                                                 (3.4)
                                                    5 2
                                             ≤ 1 − t ∑ q2j
                                                    3      j
                                                      2
                                                    5
                                             = 1 − t ∥ X̄k⊤ X̄k − Ir ∥2F .
                                                    3
Indeed, the scalar factor in the second line is bounded by 1 − 5t/3 for q j ∈ [−1/6,1/6]
and t ≤ 1/4: if q j ≥ 0, then 1 − 2t(1 + q j )+ t2 q j (1 + q j ) ≤ 1 − 2t ≤ 1 − 5t/3; if q j < 0, then
1 − 2t(1 + q j )+ t2 q j (1 + q j ) ≤ 1 − 2t(5/6) = 1 − 5t/3.
     It remains to include the perturbation αξ k in (3.2). Since the       √ singular values of Zk are
σj |1 − tq j |, the bounds |q j | ≤ 1/6 and t ≤ 1/4 imply ∥ Zk ∥2 ≤ 7/6. Hence, using X̄k+1 =
Zk + αξ k ,
          ∥ X̄k⊤+1 X̄k+1 − Ir ∥ F ≤ ∥ Zk⊤ Zk − Ir ∥ F + 2α∥ Zk ∥2 ∥ξ k ∥ F + α2 ∥ξ k ∥2F
                                                                     r                        2
                                           5        ⊤                      7 ∥ξ k ∥ F 2 ∥ξ k ∥ F
                                  ≤ 1 − t ∥ X̄k X̄k − Ir ∥ F + 2t                    +t             .
                                           3                               6 β             β
     Combine the assumed β condition and (3.3), we have
                                              ∥ξ k ∥ F    1
                                                       ≤ √ .
                                                β       12 2
Since ∥ X̄k⊤ X̄k − Ir ∥ F ≤ 1/6, t ≤ 1/4, and
                                    r
                                      7 1     t  1  1   5
                                  2       √ +   ≤ +    ≤ ,
                                      6 12 2 288 6 1152 18
we obtain                                                         
                                                                5 1 5t 1
                              ∥ X̄k⊤+1 X̄k+1 − Ir ∥ F ≤       1− t   + = .
                                                                3 6 18 6
Hence X̄k+1 ∈ R, as claimed.
ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 1 (2026), pp. 1-27                         11


3.3    Joint-error recursion in an equivalent norm
We next control the disagreement-correction subsystem associated with RF-EXTRA. The
key point is that one should not work with the Frobenius operator norm of the linear
transition matrix. We therefore begin with a standard equivalent-norm lemma.
    A second subtlety is that the Lipschitz estimate for Hi ( Xi,k+1 )− Hi ( Xi,k ) involves the
next local iterate. Accordingly, the recursion below is proved in a one-step bootstrap
form: averaged-region control together with small primal and auxiliary disagreement
first imply Xi,k ,Xi,k+1 ∈ B , and only then is the L H -Lipschitz property invoked.
Lemma 3.2 ( [46]). For any given ε > 0, there exists an operator norm ∥·∥S (dependent on A and
ε) such that ∥ A∥S ≤ ρ( A)+ ε. Consequently, if ρ( A)< 1, then there exists an operator norm ∥·∥S
for which ∥ A∥S < 1.
      Under Assumption 2, define
                                                             
                                                    W− J  I
                                         P :=                   .
                                                    W−V I − J
Using the standard state-space representation of EXTRA [4, 5], the RF-EXTRA disagree-
ment state satisfies
                                                                      
                                                            0
                     pk+1 = Ppk + αδk ,  δk :=                           .       (3.5)
                                                 ( J − I )(Hk+1 − Hk )
By [47], the condition σ2 (W ) < 1 implies ρ( P) < 1. Applying Lemma 3.2 to A = P, we may
therefore fix an operator norm ∥·∥S and constants c1 ,c2 > 0 such that
                          ∥ P∥S =: σ < 1,           c1 ∥ A ∥ F ≤ ∥ A ∥ S ≤ c2 ∥ A ∥ F
for all stacked variables A in the joint-error space.
Lemma 3.3 (Joint-error recursion in an equivalent norm). Recall the stacked quantities pk ,
Hk , and σ introduced earlier. Let c1 ,c2 > 0 satisfy
                                     c1 ∥ A ∥ F ≤ ∥ A ∥ S ≤ c2 ∥ A ∥ F .
Let
                                         1+σ                        √
                                  a :=       ,          BH := c2 L H n.
                                          2
Assume that, for some δS > 0,
                                                                            √ 
                                                                     1        n
                    X̄k ∈ R,     ∥pk ∥S ≤ δS ,    δS ≤ c1 min              ,      ,
                                                                1 + σ2 (W ) L H
                                                                   √
                            1     1    1 c1 (1 − σ )                            
                α ≤ min        ,     , ,             ,1 ,     β ≥ 12 2 Mg + 1 .
                           4L H 4βLb 4β 8c2 L H
Then X̄k+1 ∈ R, and
                               ∥pk+1 ∥S ≤ a∥pk ∥S + α2 BH ∥ H ( X̄k )∥ F .                  (3.6)
12                                  ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 1 (2026), pp. 1-27


Proof. Let
                                     e k := Xk − Xk ,
                                     X                           sek := sk − sk .
From (3.5), we have
                                      ∥ p k +1 ∥ S ≤ σ ∥ p k ∥ S + α ∥ δ k ∥ S .                            (3.7)
By norm equivalence and the bound ∥pk ∥S ≤ δS ,

                             e k ∥ F ≤ ∥pk ∥ F ≤ δS ,
                            ∥X
                                                                                    δ
                                                                ∥sek ∥ F ≤ ∥pk ∥ F ≤ S .
                                                 c1                                 c1

Since X̄k ∈ R, we have ∥ X̄k⊤ X̄k − Ir ∥ F ≤ 1/6, and hence
                                                                                            √
                                                          √                                  r 7r
                 ∥ X̄k ∥2F = tr( X̄k⊤ X̄k ) ≤ tr( Ir )+       r ∥ X̄k⊤ X̄k − Ir ∥ F ≤ r +     ≤ .
                                                                                            6  6
                        √
Therefore ∥ X̄k ∥ F ≤      7r/6. Together with δS /c1 ≤ 1/(1 + σ2 (W )) ≤ 1, this yields
                                                  √                √
                                                          e k ∥ F ≤ 7r/6 + 1,
        ∥ Xi,k ∥ F ≤ ∥ X̄k ∥ F +∥ Xi,k − X̄k ∥ F ≤ 7r/6 +∥X                      i = 1,...,n,

hence Xi,k ∈ B for all i.                               √
    The assumptions imply ∥Xk − Xk ∥ F ≤ δS /c1 ≤ min{1, n/L H }, and hence all conditions
in the second part of Lemma 3.1 are satisfied. Therefore

                                                   X̄k+1 ∈ R.

Moreover, subtracting the average from the primal recursion yields

                                          e k +1 = ( W − J ) X
                                          X                  e k + sek .

Therefore
                      ∥X                     e k ∥ F +∥sek ∥ F ≤ (1 + σ2 (W )) δS ≤ 1.
                         e k+1 ∥ F ≤ σ2 (W )∥X
                                                                               c1
                                                      √
Using again X̄k+1 ∈ R, we obtain ∥ X̄k+1 ∥ F ≤ 7r/6 and hence
                                                     √                       √
 ∥ Xi,k+1 ∥ F ≤ ∥ X̄k+1 ∥ F +∥ Xi,k+1 − X̄k+1 ∥ F ≤ 7r/6 +∥X      e k+1 ∥ F ≤ 7r/6 + 1,             i = 1,...,n,

so Xi,k+1 ∈ B for all i. Thus every point at which Hi is evaluated in the present step lies in
B . Since J (W − V) = 0 and sk = −α(1n ⊗ Id ) H̄k , the primal increment satisfies
                                                            e k + sek − αHk ,
                                   X k +1 − X k = ( W − I ) X

where H̄k := n−1 ∑in=1 Hi ( Xi,k ) and Hk := (1n ⊗ Id ) H̄k . Therefore,

                                                       e k ∥ F +∥sek ∥ F + α∥Hk ∥ F .
                              ∥ X k +1 − X k ∥ F ≤ 2 ∥ X                                                    (3.8)
ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 1 (2026), pp. 1-27                                        13


Because Xi,k ,Xi,k+1 ∈ B for every i, each Hi is L H -Lipschitz along this step, and therefore

                                               LH n                      L
                                                      ∥ X̄k − Xi,k ∥ F ≤ √H ∥Xk − Xk ∥ F ,
                                                n i∑
                      ∥ H ( X̄k )− H̄k ∥ F ≤
                                                   =1                      n

which implies                                              √
                                                  e k ∥ F + n ∥ H ( X̄k )∥ F .
                                   ∥Hk ∥ F ≤ L H ∥X                                                        (3.9)
Substituting (3.9) into (3.8) and using αL H ≤ 1 give
                                                     √                               √
                                e k ∥ F +∥sek ∥ F + α n ∥ H ( X̄k )∥ F ≤ 4∥pk ∥ F + α n ∥ H ( X̄k )∥ F .
       ∥ X k +1 − X k ∥ F ≤ 3 ∥ X

Therefore we have
                                                                        √
               ∥Hk+1 − Hk ∥ F ≤ L H ∥Xk+1 − Xk ∥ F ≤ 4L H ∥pk ∥ F + αL H n ∥ H ( X̄k )∥ F .

Hence
                                                            4c2 L H
                     ∥ δ k ∥ S ≤ c 2 ∥ H k +1 − H k ∥ F ≤           ∥pk ∥S + αBH ∥ H ( X̄k )∥ F .
                                                              c1
Combining this with (3.7) yields
                                             
                                     4c2 L H
                  ∥ p k +1 ∥ S ≤ σ +         α ∥pk ∥S + α2 BH ∥ H ( X̄k )∥ F .
                                       c1

The restriction α ≤ c1 (1 − σ)/(8c2 L H ) gives

                                                 4c2 L H    1+σ
                                           σ+            α≤     = a,
                                                   c1        2
which proves (3.6).

Remark. A direct Frobenius-norm contraction argument is unavailable for the RF-
EXTRA transition
             √     matrix P. Indeed, if u ̸= 0 satisfies Ju = 0 and z =[0;u]⊤ , then Pz =[u;u]⊤ ,
so ∥ Pz∥ F = 2 ∥u∥ F > ∥z∥ F . Thus any contraction inequality directly under ∥·∥ F is infea-
sible. This is why the introduction of the S-norm is crucial.

3.4    Neighborhood propagation
Once the joint-error recursion is available, we propagate the invariant neighborhood gen-
erated by Lemma 3.4. The pointwise boundedness facts needed later are simple conse-
quences of the already-established disagreement control and averaged-region control, so
we use them directly inside the final theorem proof instead of isolating them as a separate
lemma.
14                                ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 1 (2026), pp. 1-27


Lemma 3.4 (One-step propagation of the joint neighborhood). Let δS > 0, and define

                                   NS (δS ) := {(X,s) : ∥p∥S ≤ δS }.

Let
                                              √                     1+σ
                                  BH := c2 L H n,            a :=       .
                                                                     2
Assume the hypotheses of Lemma 3.3. If, for some k ≥ 0,
                                                                         s
                                                                             (1 − a)δS
                       X̄k ∈ R,      (Xk ,sk ) ∈ NS (δS ),          α≤                 ,
                                                                              BH M H

then
                               X̄k+1 ∈ R,       (Xk+1 ,sk+1 ) ∈ NS (δS ).
Proof. By Lemma 3.3, we have X̄k+1 ∈ R and

                               ∥pk+1 ∥S ≤ a∥pk ∥S + α2 BH ∥ H ( X̄k )∥ F .

Since X̄k ∈ R and R is bounded, continuity of H implies

                                          ∥ H ( X̄k )∥ F ≤ M H .

Using ∥pk ∥S ≤ δS , we obtain

                                     ∥pk+1 ∥S ≤ aδS + α2 BH M H .

The stepsize restriction yields

                                        α2 BH M H ≤ (1 − a)δS ,

hence
                                  ∥pk+1 ∥S ≤ aδS +(1 − a)δS = δS .
Hence (Xk+1 ,sk+1 ) ∈ NS (δS ).

   The recursive bound above also yields a summed estimate for the joint error, which
will be used in the final descent argument.
Lemma 3.5 (Summed joint-error bound). Assume that, for each k = 0,...,K, the one-step hy-
potheses of Lemma 3.3 hold. Then
             K                                                       K
            ∑      ∥Xk+1 − Xk+1 ∥2F +∥sk+1 − sk+1 ∥2F ≤ CP,0 + α2 CP,1 ∑ ∥ H ( X̄k )∥2F ,        (3.10)
            k =0                                                                 k =0

where
                                    2a2                              2nc2 L2
                         CP,0 := 2           ∥p0 ∥2S ,       CP,1 := 2 2 H 2 .
                                c1 (1 − a2 )                        c1 (1 − a )
ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 1 (2026), pp. 1-27                                            15


Proof. Unrolling (3.6) gives
                                                                        k
                              ∥pk+1 ∥S ≤ ak+1 ∥p0 ∥S + α2 BH ∑ ak−t ∥ H ( X̄t )∥ F .
                                                                    t =0

Set ht := ∥ H ( X̄t )∥ F . Using (u + v)2 ≤ 2u2 + 2v2 , we obtain
                                                                                               !2
                                                                                k
                               ∥pk+1 ∥2S ≤ 2a2k+2 ∥p0 ∥2S + 2α4 B2H         ∑a      k−t
                                                                                          ht        .
                                                                            t =0

Summing over k = 0,...,K yields
                                                                                                        !2
                     K                                  K                    K        k
                    ∑ ∥pk+1 ∥2S ≤ 2∥p0 ∥2S ∑ a2k+2 + 2α4 B2H ∑ ∑ ak−t ht                                     .
                   k =0                             k =0                    k =0     t =0

The geometric-series bound gives
                                                    K
                                                                   a2
                                                  ∑ a2k+2 ≤ 1 − a2 .
                                                  k =0

For the second term, Cauchy–Schwarz implies
                         !2          !                                      !
                                              k              k
                         k
                                                                                      1 k k−t 2
                     ∑ ak−t ht          ≤    ∑ ak−t         ∑ ak−t h2t          ≤
                                                                                    1 − a t∑
                                                                                              a ht .
                     t =0                    t =0           t =0                           =0

Summing over k and exchanging the order of summation,
                                    !2
                  K    k
                                           1 K 2 K k−t            1         K
                ∑ ∑       a k−t
                                h t    ≤
                                         1 − a ∑ t∑h      a ≤
                                                              ( 1 − a ) 2 ∑ t
                                                                               h2 .
                k =0 t =0                      t =0 k = t                 t =0

Therefore,
                             K                                                  K
                                              2a2                  2α4 B2
                             ∑ ∥pk+1 ∥2S ≤ 1 − a2 ∥p0 ∥2S + (1 − aH)2 ∑ ∥ H (X̄k )∥2F .
                         k =0                                               k =0
Finally, norm equivalence gives
                                                           1
                      ∥Xk+1 − Xk+1 ∥2F +∥sk+1 − sk+1 ∥2F ≤ 2 ∥pk+1 ∥2S ,
                                                          c1
                                √
and, since α ≤ 1 and BH = c2 L H n,
    K                                                     2 2     K
                                       2a2             2 2nc2 L H
   ∑ k+1 k+1 F k+1 k+1 F c2 (1 − a2 ) 0 S c2 (1 − a)2 ∑ ∥ H (X̄k )∥2F .
        ∥ X − X ∥ 2
                    +∥ s − s ∥ 2
                                   ≤       ∥ p ∥ 2
                                                   + α
   k =0                              1                   1        k =0

This is exactly (3.10).
16                                 ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 1 (2026), pp. 1-27


3.5     Exact O(1/K ) convergence rate
We now combine averaged descent with the summed joint-error bound. Summing
the descent inequality along the averaged trajectory and comparing the different terms
through Lemma 3.5 yields an exact O(1/K ) convergence rate. Recall that the descent
coefficient c H is defined in Proposition 3.6.
Lemma 3.6 (Descent lemma for the averaged RF-EXTRA sequence). Let H̄k :=
n−1 ∑in=1 Hi ( Xi,k ), let Qk := X̄k⊤ X̄k − Ir . Suppose Assumption 1 holds, suppose moreover that
Xi,k ∈ B for all i = 1,...,n and X̄k ∈ R. Assume further that the remaining hypotheses in the sec-
ond part of Lemma 3.1, including
                              n        itsoparameter assumptions, are satisfied at iteration k. Assume
                                3     1
β ≥ 56L2f , and let α ≤ min    8Lh , 4L H   , then we have

                                               3α
                      h( X̄k+1 ) ≤ h( X̄k )−      ∥ H ( X̄k )∥2F + Γ X (α)∥Xk − Xk ∥2F ,               (3.11)
                                               16
where
                                      17αL2H α2 Lh L2H         5L
                              Γ X (α) :=     +         ≤ Γ♯X := H .
                                        8n       n              8n
Proof. Write Hk := H ( X̄k ). By the second part of Lemma 3.1, we obtain X̄k+1 ∈ R. Hence
X̄k , X̄k+1 ∈ R ⊂ B , and h is Lh -smooth on B ,
                                                                      α2 L h
                        h( X̄k+1 ) ≤ h( X̄k )− α⟨∇h( X̄k ), H̄k ⟩+           ∥ H̄k ∥2F .               (3.12)
                                                                        2
Split the inner product into
                                 −α⟨∇h( X̄k )− Hk , H̄k ⟩− α⟨ Hk , H̄k ⟩.
Since X k ∈ R implies || X k ||22 ≤ 76 , we have
                                         9                            21
                     ∥∇h( X̄k )− Hk ∥2F ≤ ∥ X̄k ( X̄kT X̄k − Ir )∥2F ≤ L2f ∥ Qk ∥2F .
                                         4                            8
Moreover,
                             L                                                   2L2H
            ∥ Hk − H̄k ∥ F ≤ √H ∥Xk − Xk ∥ F ,         ∥ H̄k ∥2F ≤ 2∥ Hk ∥2F +        ∥Xk − Xk ∥2F .
                               n                                                  n
                                                              2
Next we bound ⟨∇h( X̄k )− Hk , H̄k ⟩, ⟨ Hk , H̄k ⟩ and α 2Lh ∥ H̄k ∥2F separately. For the first one,
Young’s inequality gives
                                                                        
                                                               1
      −α⟨∇h( X̄k )− Hk , H̄k ⟩ ≤ α 4∥∇h( X̄k )− Hk ∥2F + ∥ H̄k ∥2F
                                                              16
                                                                                          
                                      21 2          2   1              2  2L2H           2
                               ≤ α 4 · L f ∥ Qk ∥ F +         2∥ Hk ∥ F +      ∥Xk − Xk ∥ F
                                       8               16                   n
                                 21                 α            αL2
                               = αL2f ∥ Qk ∥2F + ∥ Hk ∥2F + H ∥Xk − Xk ∥2F .
                                  2                 8              8n
ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 1 (2026), pp. 1-27                        17


For the second term, we write

                    −α⟨ Hk , H̄k ⟩ = −α⟨ Hk , H̄k − Hk ⟩− α∥ Hk ∥2F
                                                                  
                                        1
                                   ≤ α ∥ Hk ∥2F + 2∥ H̄k − Hk ∥2F − α∥ Hk ∥2F
                                        8
                                                                      
                                        1        2   2L2H
                                   ≤ α ∥ Hk ∥ F +         ∥Xk − Xk ∥ F − α∥ Hk ∥2F
                                                                     2
                                        8             n
                                      7α             2αL2H
                                   = − ∥ Hk ∥2F +          ∥Xk − Xk ∥2F .
                                       8               n
Finally, using the bound on ∥ H̄k ∥2F , we obtain
                                                                                 
                        α2 L h             α2 L h               2L2
                               ∥ H̄k ∥2F ≤          2∥ Hk ∥2F + H ∥Xk − Xk ∥2F
                          2                  2                    n
                                                            α Lh L2H
                                                              2
                                         = α2 Lh ∥ Hk ∥2F +          ∥Xk − Xk ∥2F .
                                                                n
Therefore, plugging the above three expressions into (3.12), we have
                                                                            
                             21                                      3α
       h( X̄k+1 ) ≤ h( X̄k )+ αL2f ∥ Qk ∥2F + Γ X (α)∥Xk − Xk ∥2F + − + α2 Lh ∥ Hk ∥2F .
                             2                                        4

Because α ≤ 3/(8Lh ), the last coefficient is bounded above by −3α/8. Since X̄k ∈ R,
Lemma 3.1 gives
                                    ∥ Hk ∥2F ≥ β∥ Qk ∥2F ,
hence
                                                     21L f  2
                                   21 2
                                     αL f ∥ Qk ∥2F ≤       α∥ Hk ∥2F .
                                   2                  2β
Substituting this estimate yields
                                               2
                                                     !
                                        3 21L f
                 h( X̄k+1 ) ≤ h( X̄k )−   −              α∥ Hk ∥2F + Γ X (α)∥Xk − Xk ∥2F ,
                                        8   2β

                                                          21L2
Because β ≥ 56L2f , the coefficient satisfies 38 − 2β f ≥ 16
                                                           3
                                                             , which gives (3.11). Since α ≤
    n           o
min 8L3 h , 4L1H , then

                                      17αL2H 3αL2H 5αL2H 5L H
                          Γ X (α) ≤         +     =     ≤     = Γ♯X .
                                        8n    8n    2n    8n
18                                 ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 1 (2026), pp. 1-27


Theorem 3.1 (Exact O(1/K ) convergence rate for the averaged iterate). Assume Assump-
tions 1 and 2. Let δS > 0 satisfy
                                                            √ 
                                                     1        n
                                  δS ≤ c1 min              ,     ,
                                                1 + σ2 (W ) L H

and suppose X̄0 ∈ R and (X0 ,s0 ) ∈ NS (δS ). Assume that β satisfies
                                                       √             
                                         2 6 + 21C0
                                                                    
                        β ≥ max 56L f ,             , 12 2 Mg + 1 .
                                               5

Let
                                                        5L H
             ∆h := h( X̄0 )− inf h( X ),       Γ♯X :=        ,    ♯
                                                                 CP,0 := ∥X0 − X0 ∥2F + CP,0 ,
                            X ∈R                         8n
                        √                  1+σ
            BH := c2 L H n,        a :=        .
                                            2
If
                                               s                                 
                    1     1    1 c1 (1 − σ )     (1 − a)δS   1    3     3        
     α ≤ ᾱ := min       ,    , ,             ,             ,    ,   ,         ,1   ,             (3.13)
                    4L H 4βLb 4β 8c2 L H          BH M H M H + 1 8Lh 32Γ♯ CP,1 
                                                                                    X

then, for every integer K ≥ 0,
                                                                      ♯ 
                                1 K                      32 ∆h + Γ♯X CP,0
                              K + 1 k∑
                                                    2
                                        ∥ H ( X̄k )∥ F ≤                  .                       (3.14)
                                     =0
                                                            3α(K + 1)

Consequently,
                                                                       ♯ 
                                1 K                       32 ∆h + Γ♯X CP,0
                              K + 1 k∑
                                                     2
                                         ∥ G ( X̄k )∥ F ≤                  .                      (3.15)
                                     =0
                                                             3α(K + 1)
                                                                         ♯ 
                              1 K                          32 ∆h + Γ♯X CP,0
                            K + 1 k∑
                                           ⊤            2
                                      ∥ X̄k X̄k − Ir ∥ F ≤                   .                    (3.16)
                                   =0
                                                              3αβ(K + 1)
Hence the RF-EXTRA averaged iterate attains an exact O(1/K ) convergence rate.

Proof. Repeated application of Lemma 3.4 gives X̄k ∈ R and (Xk ,sk ) ∈ NS (δS ) for all k ≥ 0.
Hence X̄k+1 ∈ R as well. By norm equivalence,

                                                   1          δ       1
                      ∥Xk − Xk ∥ F ≤ ∥pk ∥ F ≤        ∥pk ∥S ≤ S ≤           ≤ 1.
                                                   c1         c1 1 + σ2 (W )
                                     √
Since X̄k ∈ R, we have ∥ X̄k ∥ F ≤        7r/6; therefore, for every i,
                                                        √                    √
              ∥ Xi,k ∥ F ≤ ∥ X̄k ∥ F +∥ Xi,k − X̄k ∥ F ≤ 7r/6 +∥Xk − Xk ∥ F ≤ 7r/6 + 1,
ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 1 (2026), pp. 1-27                             19


so Xi,k ∈ B for all i,k. Moreover, R ⊂ B , hence X̄k , X̄k+1 ∈ B . Therefore Lemma 3.6 applies
at every step. Summing (3.11) from k = 0 to K and using Γ X (α) ≤ Γ♯X yield

                                              3α K                          K
                    h( X̄K+1 ) ≤ h( X̄0 )−       ∑
                                              16 k=0
                                                     ∥ H ( X̄k )∥2F + Γ♯X ∑ ∥Xk − Xk ∥2F .
                                                                          k =0

Now split the consensus sum as
                        K                                        K −1
                        ∑ ∥Xk − Xk ∥2F = ∥X0 − X0 ∥2F + ∑ ∥Xk+1 − Xk+1 ∥2F .
                       k =0                                      k =0

Applying Lemma 3.5 to the second term and discarding the nonnegative ∥sk+1 − sk+1 ∥2F
part give
             K                                  K −1                                      K
          ∑ ∥Xk − Xk ∥2F ≤ CP,0
                            ♯
                                + α2 CP,1 ∑ ∥ H ( X̄k )∥2F ≤ CP,0
                                                              ♯
                                                                  + α2 CP,1 ∑ ∥ H ( X̄k )∥2F .
          k =0                                  k =0                                     k =0

Substituting this estimate gives
                                                                 K
                                              3α
                 h( X̄K+1 ) ≤ h( X̄0 )−
                                              16
                                                 − Γ♯X α2 CP,1     ∑ ∥ H (X̄k )∥2F + Γ♯X CP,0
                                                                                          ♯
                                                                                              .
                                                                   k =0

By (3.13),
                                      3                         3α                3α
                       Γ♯X αCP,1 ≤       ,       hence             − Γ♯X α2 CP,1 ≥ .
                                      32                        16                32
Since h( X̄K+1 ) ≥ infX ∈R h( X ), we conclude that

                  3α K
                     ∑
                  32 k=0
                         ∥ H ( X̄k )∥2F ≤ h( X̄0 )− h( X̄K+1 )+ Γ♯X CP,0
                                                                     ♯
                                                                         ≤ ∆h + Γ♯X CP,0
                                                                                     ♯
                                                                                         .


Dividing by K + 1 proves (3.14). Finally, Lemma 3.1 gives

                              ∥ H ( X̄k )∥2F ≥ ∥ G ( X̄k )∥2F + β∥ X̄k⊤ X̄k − Ir ∥2F ,

hence (3.15) and (3.16) follow immediately from (3.14).

    The convergence proof preserves the averaged iterate and the joint error introduced
earlier, while replacing a Frobenius-norm contraction argument by an equivalent-norm
analysis of the EXTRA subsystem. As a result, the final estimate is obtained through a
transparent descent-and-accumulation argument: averaged descent provides the main
decrease, the joint-error recursion quantifies the network-induced perturbation, and the
summed joint-error bound makes it possible to conclude under explicit conditions on α
and β.
20                              ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 1 (2026), pp. 1-27


4     Experiments
In this section, we compare RF-EXTRA with four decentralized baselines: DPRGD [29],
DPRGT [30], DESTINY [41], and REXTRA [31]. Our implementation follows the experi-
mental setting of [31] as closely as possible.

4.1   Decentralized principal component analysis
The decentralized principal component analysis (PCA) problem seeks a common low-
dimensional subspace that preserves the maximal variation of data distributed across
multiple agents. It can be formulated as

                            1 n
                           2n i∑
                  minn −          tr( Xi⊤ Ai⊤ Ai Xi ),          s.t.    X1 = ··· = Xn ,         (4.1)
                  X∈M
                               =1

where Mn := St(d,r )n , St(d,r ) is the Stiefel manifold, n is the number of agents, and
Ai ∈ Rmi ×d is the local data matrix stored at agent i. As in [31], if X ∗ solves (4.1), then
X ∗ Q is also a solution for any orthogonal matrix Q ∈ Rr×r . We therefore measure the
distance to a reference solution by

                             ds ( X,X ∗ ) :=       min          ∥ XQ − X ∗ ∥.
                                               Q⊤ Q= QQ⊤ = Ir

4.1.1 Synthetic dataset
We fix m1 = ··· = mn = 1000, d = 10, r = 5, and n = 8. A Gaussian matrix B ∈ R1000n×d is
generated and decomposed as B = UΣV ⊤ . We then set Σ    e = diag(ξ j ) with ξ ∈ (0,1) and
                e   ⊤
construct A = U ΣV , whose rows are partitioned uniformly across the n agents. The first
r columns of V form a solution to (4.1). In all experiments we use ξ = 0.8. For the PCA
problem, the effective scaling is chosen as

                                                      β̂n
                                            α=              .
                                                   ∑in=1 mi

All algorithms use constant step sizes. For the synthetic comparison below, the step size
is selected from
                         {1,2,4,6,8}×{10−5 ,10−4 ,10−3 ,10−2 }.
    We first study the robustness of RF-EXTRA with respect to graph topology and the
internal parameter β. Figure 1 shows that the same qualitative behavior is preserved
across ring, star, and ER graphs of different densities, and also across a wide range of
internal β values. This supports the claim that the retraction-free recursion is reasonably
stable under moderate changes in both network structure and internal tuning.
    We next compare the wall-clock efficiency of RF-EXTRA and REXTRA under matched
graph settings. Table 1 shows that, once both methods are stably tuned, RF-EXTRA is
ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 1 (2026), pp. 1-27                                                                                           21


                                        Graph comparison                                                            Graph comparison
                                                             RF-EXTRA, ring                                                              RF-EXTRA, ring
                                                             RF-EXTRA, star                                                              RF-EXTRA, star
                                                             RF-EXTRA, ER(p=0.4)                10 3                                     RF-EXTRA, ER(p=0.4)
                    102                                      RF-EXTRA, ER(p=0.8)                                                         RF-EXTRA, ER(p=0.8)
                                                                                                10 4
                    101                                                                         10 5
    ||gradf(xk)||                                                                   ||xk xk||
                    100                                                                         10 6
                                                                                                10 7
                    10 1                                                                        10 8
                    10 2                                                                        10 9
                           0   1000   2000    3000    4000    5000           6000                      0   1000   2000    3000    4000    5000           6000
                                              Epoch                                                                       Epoch
                                       Internal comparison                                                         Internal comparison
                                                               RF-EXTRA, =0.01                                                             RF-EXTRA, =0.01
                                                               RF-EXTRA, =0.1
                                                               RF-EXTRA, =1
                                                                                                10 3                                       RF-EXTRA, =0.1
                                                                                                                                           RF-EXTRA, =1
                    102                                        RF-EXTRA, =10                                                               RF-EXTRA, =10
                                                               RF-EXTRA, =100                   10 4                                       RF-EXTRA, =100

                    101                                                                         10 5

    ||gradf(xk)||                                                                   ||xk xk||
                    100                                                                         10 6
                                                                                                10 7
                    10 1
                                                                                                10 8
                    10 2                                                                        10 9
                           0   1000   2000    3000    4000    5000           6000                      0   1000   2000    3000    4000    5000           6000
                                              Epoch                                                                       Epoch

Figure 1: Synthetic decentralized PCA: robustness of RF-EXTRA with respect to graph topology and internal
β. Top row: stationarity and consensus trajectories under ring, star, ER(0.4), and ER(0.8) graphs. Bottom
row: the same quantities when the internal parameter β varies in {0.01,0.1,1,10,100} on the ring graph.


typically slightly faster than REXTRA, which is consistent with the additional cost of
retraction operations in the latter.
    After these focused robustness and efficiency checks, we turn to the standard syn-
thetic decentralized PCA task under the same ER(0.6) graph, seed, and epoch budget for
all methods. Figure 2 reports the best run of RF-EXTRA, DESTINY, DPRGT, DPRGD, and
REXTRA under this unified search space. RF-EXTRA is competitive with the strongest
baselines across the communication budget, and its performance is close to that of REX-
TRA. Combined with the wall-clock comparison in Table 1, this indicates that RF-EXTRA
achieves similar empirical behavior while avoiding the extra retraction cost.

4.1.2 MNIST dataset
To further evaluate the practical behavior of RF-EXTRA on real data, we conduct exper-
iments on the MNIST dataset. The dataset contains 60,000 handwritten digit images of
size 28 × 28, which are used to generate the local matrices Ai . We first normalize the pixel
values by dividing by 255 and then randomly partition the data into n = 8 agents with
equal numbers of samples. As a result, each agent holds a local matrix Ai of dimen-
sion 60000
       n × 784. We compute the top r = 2 principal components with ambient dimension
d = 784, use a stopping threshold ∥ grad f ( x̄k )∥ < 10−6 , and choose the effective scaling
                                                                                     β̂
                                                                        α=               .
                                                                                   60000
22                                                                                           ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 1 (2026), pp. 1-27



               Table 1: Final wall-clock time (seconds) of RF-EXTRA and REXTRA on ER graphs. Smaller is better.
                                                        Method / stepsize                                                            p = 0.4                  p = 0.6               p = 0.8
                                                        RF-EXTRA, β̂ = 0.3                                                            0.617                    0.583                 0.588
                                                        RF-EXTRA, β̂ = 0.05                                                           3.388                    3.268                 3.384
                                                        RF-EXTRA, β̂ = 0.008                                                         20.433                   20.716                22.598
                                                        REXTRA, β̂ = 0.3                                                              0.609                    0.645                 0.670
                                                        REXTRA, β̂ = 0.05                                                             3.613                    3.574                 3.570
                                                        REXTRA, β̂ = 0.008                                                           23.447                   22.364                23.669

                                              RF-EXTRA, =0.08
                                                                                103                                RF-EXTRA, =0.08               10 2                             RF-EXTRA, =0.08                                                  RF-EXTRA, =0.08
              102                             DESTINY, =0.08                                                       DESTINY, =0.08                                                 DESTINY, =0.08                                                   DESTINY, =0.08
                                              DPRGT, =0.08                      101                                DPRGT, =0.08                                                   DPRGT, =0.08                     10 1                            DPRGT, =0.08
              100                             DPRGD, =0.006                                                        DPRGD, =0.006                 10 4                             DPRGD, =0.006                                                    DPRGD, =0.006
                                              REXTRA, =0.08                                                        REXTRA, =0.08                                                  REXTRA, =0.08                                                    REXTRA, =0.08
             10 2                                                               10 1                                                                                                                               10 3

                                                                ||gradf(xk)||                                                        ||xk xk||                                                      ds(xk, x * )
                                                                                                                                                 10 6
f(xk) f *
             10 4                                                               10 3                                                                                                                               10 5
             10 6                                                                                                                                10 8
                                                                                10 5                                                                                                                               10 7
             10 8
            10 10                                                               10 7                                                             10 10                                                             10 9
            10 12
                    0              2                      4                            0                2                      4                         0             2                      4                           0             2                      4
                         Communication quantities                                             Communication quantities                                       Communication quantities                                         Communication quantities


Figure 2: Synthetic decentralized PCA on ER(0.6) versus communication quantities. Each method uses its best
step size selected from {1,2,4,6,8}×{10−5 ,10−4 ,10−3 ,10−2 }. Under this matched search space, RF-EXTRA,
DESTINY, DPRGT, and REXTRA all select β̂ = 0.08, while DPRGD selects β̂ = 0.006.


Similar to the synthetic PCA setting, all methods use constant step sizes, and we select
the best available step size from the grid

                                                                                               {1,2,6}×{10−4 ,10−3 ,10−2 }.

Among the runs already completed in this grid, the strongest available setting is β̂ = 0.06
for RF-EXTRA, DESTINY, and DPRGT, while the best available DPRGD run uses β̂ = 0.02.
Accordingly, Figure 3 reports RF-EXTRA, DESTINY, and DPRGT at β̂ = 0.06 together with
DPRGD at β̂ = 0.02.
    Figure 3 shows that RF-EXTRA and DESTINY perform similarly and both improve
on DPRGT in the later stage, while DPRGD remains clearly weaker within the same com-
munication budget.

4.2                     Decentralized low-rank matrix completion
Low-rank matrix completion (LRMC) aims to recover a low-rank matrix A ∈ Rd×T from a
subset of its observed entries. Let Ω denote the index set of observed entries. The rank-r
LRMC problem can be written as

                                                                                                                1               2
                                                                                                  min             PΩ ⊙( XV − A) ,
                                                                                           X ∈Gr(d,r ), V ∈Rr×T 2
ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 1 (2026), pp. 1-27                                                                                                                                                                                           23


             105                               RF-EXTRA, =0.06                                                   RF-EXTRA, =0.06            10 2                                RF-EXTRA, =0.06                    100                               RF-EXTRA, =0.06
                                               DESTINY, =0.06                  104                               DESTINY, =0.06                                                 DESTINY, =0.06                                                       DESTINY, =0.06
             103                               DPRGT, =0.06                                                      DPRGT, =0.06                                                   DPRGT, =0.06                      10 1                               DPRGT, =0.06
                                               DPRGD, =0.02                                                      DPRGD, =0.02
                                                                                                                                            10 4                                DPRGD, =0.02                                                         DPRGD, =0.02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  10 2
             101                                                               102
                                                                                                                                            10 6                                                                  10 3

f(xk) f *                                                         gradf(xk)                                                         xk xk                                                          ds(xk, x * )
            10 1                                                                                                                                                                                                  10 4
                                                                               100
                                                                                                                                            10 8                                                                  10 5
            10 3
                                                                              10 2                                                          10 10                                                                 10 6
            10 5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  10 7
            10 7                                                              10 4                                                          10 12                                                                 10 8
            10 9
                   0.0   0.2    0.4     0.6     0.8       1.0                        0.0   0.2    0.4     0.6     0.8       1.0                     0.0   0.2    0.4     0.6     0.8       1.0                           0.0   0.2    0.4     0.6     0.8        1.0
                          Communication quantities          1e8                             Communication quantities          1e8                          Communication quantities          1e8                                Communication quantities          1e8




Figure 3: Decentralized PCA on the MNIST dataset versus communication quantities. RF-EXTRA, DESTINY,
and DPRGT are plotted at β̂ = 0.06, while DPRGD is plotted at its best existing MNIST noMPI step size β̂ = 0.02
among the currently available runs from {1,2,6}×{10−4 ,10−3 ,10−2 }.


where Gr(d,r ) is the Grassmann manifold, ⊙ denotes the Hadamard product, and PΩ
is the observation mask. In the decentralized setting, the partially observed matrix is
partitioned column-wise across n agents into local blocks A1 ,..., An . Using the standard
representation of the Grassmann manifold through the Stiefel manifold, the problem can
be reformulated as a decentralized optimization problem over St(d,r ),
                                                   1 n                           2
                                              min    ∑
                                      Xi ∈St(d,r ) 2 i =1
                                                          PΩi ⊙ Xi Vi ( Xi )− Ai ,                                                                                s.t.                 X1 = ··· = Xn ,

where Ωi is the local observation pattern and Vi ( Xi ) is the corresponding least-squares
factor. Following [31], we consider a synthetic setup with T = 1000, d = 100, r = 5, and
n = 8, where the ground-truth low-rank matrix is generated from Gaussian factors and
the observation mask is sampled with rate µ =r (d + T −r )/(dT ). More precisely, if L ∈Rd×r
and R ∈ Rr×T are Gaussian factors, then the target matrix is generated as
                                                                                                            A = LR + 10−3 E,
where E ∈ Rd×T has i.i.d. standard normal entries. Thus, the LRMC instance is mildly
perturbed from an exactly rank-r model. We adopt a ring graph to model the communi-
cation network among agents. For LRMC, we use the effective scaling
                                                                                                                    α = β̂ × n.
All algorithms are implemented with constant step sizes, and the candidate step sizes are
selected from the grid
                            {1,2,5,8}×{10−4 ,10−3 ,10−2 }.
We run each method for at most 1500 epochs and terminate early if ∥ grad f ( x̄k )∥ < 10−6 .
    Because the perturbed LRMC instance does not admit a practically meaningful exact
reference solution, we only report the stationarity and Euclidean consensus panels in the
revised communication plot. Figure 4 shows that RF-EXTRA reaches low stationarity and
consensus levels more rapidly than DESTINY and DPRGT in the plotted regime, while
DPRGD remains less competitive within the same budget. Figure 5 further compares
representative RF-EXTRA and DESTINY step sizes on the same communication axis and
shows the same qualitative trend.
24                                                ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 1 (2026), pp. 1-27


                      102                              RF-EXTRA, =6.25e-4                                               RF-EXTRA, =6.25e-4
                      101                              DESTINY, =2.5e-4               10 1                              DESTINY, =2.5e-4
                                                       DPRGT, =2.5e-4                                                   DPRGT, =2.5e-4
                      100                              DPRGD, =6.25e-5                10 2                              DPRGD, =6.25e-5

                     10 1
         gradf(xk)
                                                                                      10 3
                     10 2                                                     xk xk
                     10 3                                                             10 4
                     10 4
                                                                                      10 5
                     10 5
                     10 6                                                             10 6
                        0.0   0.2         0.4   0.6   0.8         1.0   1.2              0.0   0.2         0.4   0.6   0.8         1.0   1.2
                                    Communication quantities            1e7                          Communication quantities            1e7


Figure 4: Decentralized LRMC on the ring graph versus communication quantities. Only the stationarity
and Euclidean consensus panels are shown, since the perturbed instance does not provide an exact-solution
reference panel of comparable value. For each method, the step size is selected by the earliest epoch at which
∥ grad f ( x̄k )∥ < 10−6 .

                                                       RF-EXTRA, =6.25e-4                                               RF-EXTRA, =6.25e-4
                     101                               DESTINY, =6.25e-4                                                DESTINY, =6.25e-4
                                                       RF-EXTRA, =2.5e-4              10 2                              RF-EXTRA, =2.5e-4
                                                       DESTINY, =2.5e-4                                                 DESTINY, =2.5e-4
                     10 1                              RF-EXTRA, =1e-3                                                  RF-EXTRA, =1e-3
                                                       DESTINY, =1e-3                 10 4                              DESTINY, =1e-3

         gradf(xk)                                                            xk xk
                     10 3

                     10 5                                                             10 6

                     10 7                                                             10 8

                        0.0         0.5         1.0         1.5         2.0              0.0         0.5         1.0         1.5         2.0
                                    Communication quantities            1e7                          Communication quantities            1e7


Figure 5: Decentralized LRMC on the ring graph versus communication quantities for representative RF-EXTRA
and DESTINY step sizes. We again retain only the stationarity and Euclidean consensus panels.


5    Conclusion
We proposed RF-EXTRA, a decentralized retraction-free method for optimization on
the Stiefel manifold. The method combines an ambient-space surrogate for the
orthogonality-constrained local models with an EXTRA-based primal-dual recursion,
thereby preserving a simple decentralized communication structure while avoiding ex-
plicit per-iteration retractions.
    On the theoretical side, the analysis is built on the averaged iterate and the joint error
(Xk − Xk ,sk − sk ). By establishing a contractive recursion for the joint error under an equiv-
alent norm and then comparing the different terms in the descent analysis, we obtain an
exact O(1/K ) convergence guarantee for the averaged iterate.
    The experiments indicate that RF-EXTRA is a competitive retraction-free decentral-
ized solver for optimization problems on the Stiefel manifold. On PCA and low-rank
matrix completion, it delivers favorable empirical performance and communication ef-
ficiency relative to the reported baselines. These results support retraction-free decen-
ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 1 (2026), pp. 1-27                             25


tralized correction as a promising direction for large-scale optimization on matrix mani-
folds.


References
 [1] John Duchi, Alekh Agarwal, and Martin Wainwright. Dual averaging for distributed opti-
     mization: Convergence analysis and network scaling. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control,
     2011.
 [2] Kun Yuan, Qing Ling, and Wotao Yin. On the convergence of decentralized gradient descent.
     SIAM Journal on Optimization, 26(3):1835–1854, 2016.
 [3] Sulaiman A. Alghunaim and Kun Yuan. A unified and refined convergence analysis for
     non-convex decentralized learning. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, 2022.
 [4] Wei Shi, Qing Ling, Gang Wu, and Wotao Yin. Extra: An exact first-order algorithm for
     decentralized consensus optimization. SIAM Journal on Optimization, 25(2):944–966, 2015.
 [5] Kun Yuan, Bicheng Ying, Xiaochuan Zhao, and Ali H. Sayed. Exact diffusion for distributed
     optimization and learning — part i: Algorithm development. IEEE Transactions on Signal
     Processing, 2018.
 [6] Lei Huang, Xianglong Liu, Bo Lang, Adams Yu, Yongliang Wang, and Bo Li. Orthogonal
     weight normalization: Solution to optimization over multiple dependent stiefel manifolds
     in deep neural networks. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2018.
 [7] Minhyung Cho and Jaehyung Lee. Riemannian approach to batch normalization. In Ad-
     vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2017.
 [8] Furong Zhang and Mert Pilanci. Riemannian preconditioned lora for fine-tuning foundation
     models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.02347, 2024.
 [9] L Susan Blackford, Antoine Petitet, Roldan Pozo, Karin Remington, R Clint Whaley, James
     Demmel, Jack Dongarra, Iain Duff, Sven Hammarling, Greg Henry, et al. An updated
     set of basic linear algebra subprograms (blas). ACM Transactions on Mathematical Software,
     28(2):135–151, 2002.
[10] Anastasia Koloskova, Tao Lin, and Sebastian U. Stich. An improved analysis of gradient
     tracking for decentralized machine learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
     Systems, 2022.
[11] Hanlin Tang, Xiangru Lian, Ming Yan, Ce Zhang, and Ji Liu. D2 : Decentralized training over
     decentralized data. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning, 2018.
[12] Huaqing Li, Lifeng Zheng, Zheng Wang, Yu Yan, Liping Feng, and Jing Guo. S-diging: A
     stochastic gradient tracking algorithm for distributed optimization. IEEE Transactions on
     Emerging Topics in Computational Intelligence, 2020.
[13] Shi Pu and Angelia Nedić. Distributed stochastic gradient tracking methods. Mathematical
     Programming, 2021.
[14] Yue Liu, Tao Lin, Anastasia Koloskova, and Sebastian U. Stich. Decentralized gradient track-
     ing with local steps. Optimization Methods and Software, 2023.
[15] Z. Li, W. Shi, and M. Yan. A decentralized proximal-gradient method with network inde-
     pendent step-sizes and separated convergence rates. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing,
     67(17):4494–4506, 2019.
[16] Mingyi Hong, Davood Hajinezhad, and Ming-Min Zhao. Prox-pda: The proximal primal-
     dual algorithm for fast distributed nonconvex optimization and learning over networks. In
     International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 1529–1538. PMLR, 2017.
26                              ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 1 (2026), pp. 1-27


[17] Kun Yuan, Sulaiman A. Alghunaim, and Xinmeng Huang. Removing data heterogeneity
     influence enhances network topology dependence of decentralized sgd. Journal of Machine
     Learning Research, 2023.
[18] Paolo Di Lorenzo and Gesualdo Scutari. Next: In-network nonconvex optimization. IEEE
     Transactions on Signal and Information Processing over Networks, 2016.
[19] Anastasia Koloskova, Sebastian U. Stich, and Martin Jaggi. Decentralized stochastic op-
     timization and gossip algorithms with compressed communication. In Proceedings of the
     International Conference on Machine Learning, 2019.
[20] Yutong He, Xinmeng Huang, and Kun Yuan. Unbiased compression saves communication
     in distributed optimization: When and how much? In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
     cessing Systems, 2023.
[21] Chuyan Chen, Yutong He, Pengrui Li, Weichen Jia, and Kun Yuan. Greedy low-rank gradi-
     ent compression for distributed learning with convergence guarantees. IEEE Transactions on
     Signal Processing, 2026.
[22] Aleksandr Beznosikov, Samuel Horváth, Peter Richtárik, and Mher Safaryan. On biased
     compression for distributed learning. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 2023.
[23] Xun Qian, Peter Richtárik, and Tong Zhang. Error compensated distributed sgd can be
     accelerated. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.
[24] Angelia Nedić, Alex Olshevsky, and Wei Shi. Achieving geometric convergence for dis-
     tributed optimization over time-varying graphs. SIAM Journal on Optimization, 2016.
[25] Liyuan Liang, Xinmeng Huang, Ran Xin, and Kun Yuan. Understanding the influence of
     digraphs on decentralized optimization: Effective metrics, lower bound, and optimal algo-
     rithm. SIAM Journal on Optimization, 2025.
[26] Sulaiman A. Alghunaim. Local exact-diffusion for decentralized optimization and learning.
     IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 2024.
[27] Bicheng Ying, Kun Yuan, Yiming Chen, Hanbin Hu, Pan Pan, and Wotao Yin. Exponential
     graph is provably efficient for decentralized deep training. In Advances in Neural Information
     Processing Systems, 2021.
[28] Shixiang Chen, Alfredo Garcia, Mingyi Hong, and Shahin Shahrampour. Decentralized
     riemannian gradient descent on the stiefel manifold. In International Conference on Machine
     Learning, pages 1594–1605. PMLR, 2021.
[29] Kangkang Deng and Jiang Hu. Decentralized projected riemannian gradient method for
     smooth optimization on compact submanifolds embedded in the euclidean space. Nu-
     merische Mathematik, 2025.
[30] Lei Wang, Le Bao, and Xin Liu. A decentralized proximal gradient tracking algorithm for
     composite optimization on riemannian manifolds. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 2025.
[31] Jiayuan Wu, Zhanwang Deng, Jiang Hu, Weijie Su, and Zaiwen Wen. Riemannian extra:
     Communication-efficient decentralized optimization over compact submanifolds with data
     heterogeneity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.15537, 2025.
[32] Jun Chen, Lina Liu, Tianyi Zhu, Yong Liu, Guang Dai, Yunliang Jiang, and Ivor W Tsang.
     Decentralized optimization on compact submanifolds by quantized riemannian gradient
     tracking. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, 2025.
[33] Jiang Hu and Kangkang Deng. Improving the communication in decentralized manifold op-
     timization through single-step consensus and compression. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.08904,
     2024.
[34] Kangkang Deng and Jiang Hu. Decentralized projected riemannian stochastic recursive
     momentum method for nonconvex optimization. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
ReasFlow Paper Copilot / CSIAM Trans. Appl. Math., 1 (2026), pp. 1-27                               27


     Artificial Intelligence, 2025.
[35] Jun Chen, Haishan Ye, Mengmeng Wang, Tianxin Huang, Guang Dai, Ivor W Tsang, and
     Yong Liu. Decentralized riemannian conjugate gradient method on the stiefel manifold.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.10547, 2023.
[36] Jiang Hu, Kangkang Deng, and Quanzheng Li. Decentralized riemannian natural gradient
     methods with kronecker product approximations. Journal of the Operations Research Society of
     China, 2025.
[37] Shixiang Chen, Alfredo Garcia, Mingyi Hong, and Shahin Shahrampour. On the local linear
     rate of consensus on the stiefel manifold. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 2023.
[38] Roberto Tron, Bijan Afsari, and René Vidal. Riemannian consensus for manifolds with
     bounded curvature. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 2012.
[39] Alain Sarlette and Rodolphe Sepulchre. Consensus optimization on manifolds. SIAM Journal
     on Control and Optimization, 2009.
[40] Yifei Sun, Shixiang Chen, Alfredo Garcia, and Shahin Shahrampour. Global conver-
     gence of decentralized retraction-free optimization on the stiefel manifold. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2405.11590, 2024.
[41] Lei Wang and Xin Liu. Decentralized optimization over the stiefel manifold by an approxi-
     mate augmented lagrangian function. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, 2022.
[42] Pierre Ablin and Gabriel Peyré. Fast and accurate optimization on the orthogonal manifold
     without retraction. In Proceedings of The 25th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
     and Statistics, pages 5636–5657. PMLR, 2022.
[43] Bin Gao, Xin Liu, and Ya-xiang Yuan. Parallelizable algorithms for optimization problems
     with orthogonality constraints. SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing, 41(3):A1949–A1983,
     2019.
[44] Yifei Sun, Shixiang Chen, Alfredo Garcia, and Shahin Shahrampour. Local linear conver-
     gence of infeasible optimization with orthogonal constraints. IEEE Control Systems Letters,
     2024.
[45] Nachuan Xiao, Xin Liu, and Kim-Chuan Toh. Dissolving constraints for riemannian opti-
     mization. Mathematics of Operations Research, 2024.
[46] Roger A. Horn and Charles R. Johnson. Matrix Analysis. Cambridge University Press, 2012.
[47] Lei Qin and Ye Pu. Convergence analysis of extra in non-convex distributed optimization.
     IEEE Control Systems Letters, 2025.
                                                                                                                       245




Table 23 Phase 3 (Writing Quality) sub-dimension scores. III1 clarity, III2 coherence (project focus), III3 argumentation,
III4 evidence use.

                     System                                      III1    III2   III3     III4      III
                     ReasFlow WritingAgent (GPT-5.1)            8.33     7.67   8.33     8.33   8.16
                     Claude Code + ARIS (GPT-5.4)               8.00     6.00   7.67     7.67   7.33
                     Claude Code + ARIS (GPT-5.1)               6.67     5.33   5.67     4.00   5.42
                     Claude Code, vanilla (GPT-5.1)             8.00     7.33   7.67     5.67   7.17
                     Claude Code, vanilla (GPT-5.4)              8.67    7.33   8.00     6.67   7.67
                     Codex + ARIS (GPT-5.1)                     8.33     6.67   8.00     8.00   7.75
                     Codex + ARIS (GPT-5.4)                     7.33     4.67   5.33     5.00   5.58
                     Codex, vanilla (GPT-5.1)                   8.33     7.33   7.33     6.33   7.33
                     Codex, vanilla (GPT-5.4)                   5.67     4.00   4.33     4.33   4.58
                     ReasLingo (GPT-5.1)                        7.00     5.33   5.67     7.00   6.25
                     ReasLingo (GPT-5.4)                        7.00     4.33   4.33     4.67   5.08




Table 24 Phase 4 (Submittability) sub-components. IV1 compile (programmatic), IV2 visual layout (three LLM
sub-scores IV2_1 layout compliance, IV2_2 rendering integrity, IV2_3 content presentation, each averaged over
three reviewers), IV3 template compliance (programmatic). A dash (—) in a IV2 sub-column indicates no PDF was
produced; in that case IV1=IV2=0 and only IV3 contributes to IV.

        System                                      IV1    IV2_1        IV2_2   IV2_3       IV2          IV3    IV
        ReasFlow WritingAgent (GPT-5.1)              10     9.00        10.00    10.00      9.67         10    9.87
        Claude Code + ARIS (GPT-5.4)                 6      10.00       10.00    3.67       7.89         10    7.56
        Claude Code + ARIS (GPT-5.1)                 0       —           —        —         0.00         10    2.00
        Claude Code, vanilla (GPT-5.1)               1      8.00        5.33     3.33       5.55         10    4.62
        Claude Code, vanilla (GPT-5.4)               10     10.00       10.00    10.00     10.00         10    10.00
        Codex + ARIS (GPT-5.1)                       10     7.67        9.67     4.33       7.22         10    8.89
        Codex + ARIS (GPT-5.4)                       10     2.33        5.33     1.67       3.11         10    7.24
        Codex, vanilla (GPT-5.1)                     10     2.33        9.67     1.67       4.56         10    7.82
        Codex, vanilla (GPT-5.4)                     10     3.00        1.33     1.00       1.78         10    6.71
        ReasLingo (GPT-5.1)                          10     8.67        10.00    2.67       7.11         10    8.84
        ReasLingo (GPT-5.4)                          10     2.67        9.67     1.67       4.67         10    7.87
