                                         QwenPaw-Data: Bridging Facts, Methodology, and Execution for
                                                  Autonomous Enterprise Data Analytics
                                                           (Technical Report)


                                                  Tianjing Zeng† , Yuntao Hong† , Zhongjun Ding∗ , Dandan Liu∗ , Yinan Mei∗ ,
                                                 Yunxiang Su∗ , Yiming Wang∗ , Xiaojian Zhang∗ , Jingyu Zhu∗ , Junhao Zhu∗ ,
                                              Zhuowen Liang, Jiazhen Peng, Lianggui Weng, Zhihao Ding, Kerui Yi, Qifeng Wang,
                                                             Rong Zhu‡ , Bolin Ding‡ , Liyu Mou‡ , Jingren Zhou‡
                                                                              Alibaba Group



                                                                                        Abstract




arXiv:2607.11019v2 [cs.AI] 14 Jul 2026
                                                 Enterprise data analysis is emerging as a distinct frontier for autonomous agents.
                                                 Compared with general-purpose interaction and software engineering, it operates
                                                 in an open, ambiguous, and continuously evolving environment: business concepts
                                                 must be grounded to the right entities, analytical procedures must be reproducible
                                                 despite fuzzy feedback, and long-horizon workflows must execute over real en-
                                                 terprise data while preserving artifacts, provenance, and opportunities for human
                                                 intervention. These characteristics call for a data-agent architecture that treats
                                                 semantics, methodology, execution, and evolution as first-class system concerns.
                                                 To this end, we introduce QwenPaw-Data, an agentic data system designed for
                                                 enterprise intelligent data analysis. QwenPaw-Data consolidates heterogeneous
                                                 assets from warehouses, dashboards, documents, interaction logs, and historical
                                                 tasks into reusable, governable, and evolvable analysis assets, then turns natural-
                                                 language requests into end-to-end analytical workflows spanning data understand-
                                                 ing, retrieval, analysis, report generation, and decision support. Its architecture
                                                 decomposes the problem into three collaborative subsystems: DataBridge provides
                                                 trustworthy semantic grounding through interconnected metadata, knowledge, and
                                                 trace graphs; Skill-Hub codifies expert analytical methodology into reusable and
                                                 verifiable skills; and Host materializes these evidence and method assets into con-
                                                 trollable, artifact-centric runtime execution. Across these subsystems, semantics,
                                                 methods, traces, and feedback are continuously deposited back into the system,
                                                 forming a self-evolving asset flywheel. We deployed QwenPaw-Data to serve
                                                 business-intelligence users inside Alibaba, where it resolves objective queries accu-
                                                 rately and earns far higher user satisfaction on open-ended analysis than a strong
                                                 general-purpose agent. We further evaluate QwenPaw-Data on public data-agent
                                                 benchmarks for reproducibility, on which it consistently surpasses the current state
                                                 of the art. Together, these results establish QwenPaw-Data as a new paradigm for
                                                 enterprise data analysis, pointing the way toward truly autonomous enterprise data
                                                 agents.




                                          †
                                            Co-first authors.
                                          ∗
                                            Equal contribution (listed in alphabetical order).
                                          ‡
                                            Corresponding authors. Primary contact email: red.zr@alibaba-inc.com (Rong Zhu).
1     Introduction
1.1   Background

In recent time, the rapid evolution of Large Language Models (LLMs) has profoundly driven the
development of autonomous agents, along with their underlying supporting frameworks, commonly
referred to as harnesses. Both general-purpose agents (e.g., chatting agents) and specialized agents
(e.g., coding) have achieved remarkable progress in autonomy, expanded task scope, and engineering
practicality. Modern coding agents have transcended the early limitations of generating isolated code
snippets, acquiring the capability to independently manage task decomposition and debugging across
the software development life cycle. Representative examples, such as OpenAI’s CodeX [OpenAI,
2026], Anthropic’s Claude Code [Anthropic, 2026], and frameworks like SWE-agent 2 [Yang et al.,
2024], demonstrate the ability to navigate complex codebases and resolve real-world issues. Currently,
agent engineering has transitioned to scalable deployment, with industry surveys indicating that more
than half of organizations have integrated agents into production environments [LangChain, 2026].
In the realm of data science, data agents have emerged as vital instruments for assisting data analysts
(DA) and data scientists (DS). As an emerging “blue ocean” in the AI landscape, this field is
increasingly attracting widespread attention for its capacity to drive profound business impact and
strategic decision-making. Their primary technical directions focus on natural language interfaces
(e.g., Text-to-SQL), automated data exploration, multi-step reasoning, and in-depth insight generation.
For instance, frameworks such as Din-SQL [Pourreza and Rafiei, 2023] and CHASE-SQL [Pourreza
et al., 2025] leverage task decomposition and self-correction to optimize SQL generation, while end-
to-end systems like Amazon QuickSight [Amazon, 2026] and Databricks Genie Agents [Databricks,
2026a] automate workflows from data ingestion to visual report generation. Researchers have
substantially improved the accuracy of complex logical reasoning by incorporating lots of harness
techniques, e.g., Chain-of-Thought prompting and multi-agent collaboration. These breakthroughs
lower technical barriers and improve the efficiency of extracting actionable insights.
Despite the rapid proliferation of general-purpose, coding, and data agents, some fundamental
distinctions and core boundaries among these paradigms remain insufficiently delineated.

       1. First, what exactly are the fundamental distinctions and core boundaries that differentiate
          these paradigms from one another?
       2. Second, given these intrinsic characteristics and divergent operational environments, is
          it genuinely necessary to establish a dedicated technological track exclusively for data
          agents, rather than merely adapting existing coding or general-purpose frameworks?
       3. Third, if such a distinct paradigm is indeed warranted, what profound technical challenges
          must be overcome, and what specific enterprise demands should drive the tailored design
          of these specialized systems?

In this technical report, we provide in-depth answers to these critical questions by systematically
analyzing the unique characteristics and operational boundaries of enterprise data environments.
Concurrently, we introduce our proposed solution, the QwenPaw-Data system, which is specifically
architected to overcome these profound technical challenges and fulfill the tailored demands of
real-world data analytics.

1.2   Data Agent: The Fundamental Difference

A natural question is why powerful general-purpose and coding agents, backed by ever-larger founda-
tion models, do not already solve enterprise data analysis. As the claim summarized in [Anthropic,
2026], data analysis is not software engineering. We summarize the key differences in Table 1 and
elaborate the details as follows.
General-purpose agents are primarily designed as universal frameworks to tackle a broad
spectrum of everyday tasks, such as web navigation, operating system control, and general tool
utilization. While they are capable of navigating dynamic, partially observable environments using
multi-modal and heuristic feedback, they fundamentally lack the specialized mechanisms required
for rigorous domain-specific problem-solving. Because they do not account for the stringent deter-
ministic requirements of software engineering or the profound semantic ambiguity of enterprise data


                                                  2
             Table 1: Comparative Analysis of General-Purpose, Coding, and Data Agents.
 Dimension           General-Purpose              Coding                          Data
 Scenarios           Web/OS control, tool use     Code generation, debug-         Business analytics
                                                  ging
 Environment         Dynamic, partially observ-   Tool-supported, largely ver-    Open-space, ambiguous
                     able                         ifiable
 Feedback            Multimodal, sparse, de-      Explicit, binary, immediate     Fuzzy, subjective, human-
                     layed                                                        reliant
 Solution Space      Diverse trajectories         Diverse implementations         Fact-constrained conclu-
                                                                                  sions
 Search Cost         High (vast action space)     Light (tractable with verifi-   High (strict constraints)
                                                  cation)
 Verification        Weak closed-loop             Hard closed-loop                No deterministic proof
 Required            Universal framework; lacks   Syntax, logic, and execu-       Semantic        grounding,
 Guardrails          specialized guardrails       tion verification               methodology, governance


ecosystems, general-purpose agents are inherently ill-suited for complex coding and data analysis
scenarios. Their generalized architectures fail to provide the domain-specific guardrails, structured
verification loops, and deep contextual grounding necessary to ensure reliability and precision in
these specialized fields.
Coding agents primarily operate in a relatively deterministic, tool-supported verification
environment. In software engineering, mature programming toolchains—including compilers, unit
tests, static analyzers, runtime execution, and logs—provide explicit and often binary feedback for
diagnosing failures and refining implementations in a hard closed loop. Since coding tasks often admit
multiple valid implementations that satisfy the same requirements and tests, this reliable feedback
and high density of acceptable solutions make iterative search comparatively tractable.
Conversely, the data analysis tasks addressed by data agents are inherently open-space prob-
lems. Each step in the analytical workflow involves open-ended exploration without deterministic
mechanisms to prove correctness. Unlike code compilation, data queries lack explicit, automated
feedback signals, rendering the system heavily reliant on external validation, particularly human
feedback. Compounding this challenge is the profound ambiguity in both task descriptions and
intermediate results—such as concept-to-entity mapping and business context interpretation—which
makes the requisite feedback signals inherently fuzzy and subjective. Moreover, in contrast to the
diverse solutions in coding, data analysis often demands a single, unique correct answer derived from
a single authoritative source to inform a specific business decision. This rigid uniqueness, coupled
with a singular decision logic and the absence of deterministic guardrails, drastically increases the
search cost and complexity for the model, making autonomous analytics significantly more arduous
than code generation.
In conclusion, traditional general-purpose and coding agents are fundamentally incapable of
adapting to the intrinsic and stringent demands of data analysis scenarios. Therefore, the design
and implementation of a dedicated data agent is not a mere elective, but an absolute imperative.

1.3     Agents for Enterprise Data Analysis: The Difficulties

Next, we analyze the challenges confronting data agents that primarily stem from two fundamental
dimensions. The first arises from the intrinsic characteristics of data analysis tasks themselves, which
involve open-ended exploration, ambiguous feedback, and rigid solution uniqueness, as discussed
above. The second originates from the complex nature of real-world enterprise data ecosystems,
which are inherently decentralized, multi-modal, and continuously evolving.

1.3.1    Difficulties from the Intrinsic Characteristics
To be more specific, the harness designed for a data agent requires deep business context, semantic
layers, and governance. Consider a seemingly simple data analysis request: “analyze the average
GAAP value of valid users for product X.” We apply this simple question to explain the difficulties
that a data agent needs to resolve:


                                                    3
         • Grounding business concepts in the right data. The request already hides two loaded
           terms, and most errors stem from failing to map such an ambiguous business concept onto
           the right data entity, which can break down in three compounding ways.
              – Concept–entity ambiguity: “valid users” can resolve to different underlying entities—
                 the registered-user table, the login-session table, or the paid-subscription table—each a
                 legitimate mapping yet yielding a different number, while “GAAP value” must further
                 be tied to the right revenue entity under the correct product scope.
              – Staleness: schemas and metric definitions change constantly, so unmaintained knowl-
                 edge silently returns subtly wrong results.
              – Retrieval failure: even when the right entity exists and is well annotated, the vast search
                 space keeps the agent from finding or using it correctly. The bottleneck is structured
                 grounding, not access.
         • Codifying analytical methodology. Even with the data grounded correctly, the average
           GAAP value is still only a headline number. Answering the question well calls for a re-
           producible procedure—segmenting the metric across dimensions, checking distributions,
           and attributing anomalies—a form of procedural knowledge that can neither be retrieved
           as a single “correct answer” nor reliably internalized in model parameters. Such method-
           ology must also be pitched at the right level of abstraction: overly generic methods fail to
           capture business intent, while overly specific ones are bound to a single domain and lose
           transferability. Moreover, since data analysis lacks compiler-like deterministic verification,
           a standardized, reusable, and verifiable analytical methodology becomes the structural
           safeguard that replaces the missing verification.
         • Sustaining long-horizon, artifact-centric execution. Even with the right data and the
           right method, our example expands into a long chain of steps: querying the headline GAAP
           metric, detecting anomalies, decomposing and attributing it across dimensions, exploring
           new dimensions, and generating a report whose feedback is deposited for reuse. Such
           workflows are non-linear and long-running, directly execute SQL or Python over real
           business data, and produce reusable artifacts that must persist and be shared across sessions.
           This makes data analysis far more demanding than a short, self-contained action chain.
Unfortunately, as discussed in Section 1.2, existing general-purpose and coding agents do not fully
address the above difficulties:
         • General-purpose agents have no data-aware semantic model, so when pointed at a warehouse
           they must guess tables and fields (no grounding); they carry no codified analytical method-
           ology (no methodology); and they are not designed for long-running, artifact-centered
           workflows (partial execution).
         • Coding agents offer strong code generation and execution, so it is tempting to treat data
           analysis as a pure coding problem. Yet they too fall short on the same three dimensions:
           they can reach a schema but do not ground business semantics such as metric definitions
           (partial grounding); they encode no reusable analytical methodology (no methodology); and
           they run as a mostly linear action chain without long-horizon orchestration or cross-session
           artifact management (partial execution). As a result, a coding agent can produce runnable
           SQL yet still return a situationally wrong answer, and it cannot accumulate the analytical
           experience that future tasks depend on.

1.3.2    Difficulties from the Enterprise Data Ecosystems
Despite the advancements, the design of existing data agents predominantly leans toward idealized
and academic scenarios, rendering them insufficient for addressing practical enterprise challenges.
In real-world corporate environments, data ecosystems are characterized by three fundamental
complexities as follows:
        1. Decentralization. Enterprise data is highly fragmented and multi-modal, scattered across
           implicit human expertise, knowledge documents, relational databases, and unstructured
           formats, rather than residing in centralized, clean schemas.
        2. Ambiguity and Uncertainty. Analytical requests from stakeholders are inherently vague,
           necessitating a multi-step verification and interactive clarification process to progressively
           align with the exact business intents.


                                                     4
      3. Growth and Evolution. An effective analytical system must act as a growing entity
         that accumulates memory and self-evolves through fulfilled tasks, mirroring the cognitive
         development of human learning.

Consequently, current static and narrowly scoped data agent systems fail to meet the dynamic,
interactive, and continuous learning requirements of authentic enterprise data environments. Recent
evaluations utilizing benchmarks designed to simulate realistic enterprise scenarios corroborate
this deficiency. For instance, assessments on benchmarks like DABench [Ma et al., 2026] and
AgenticDataBench [Sun et al., 2026] reveal that even state-of-the-art LLM-based agents still struggle
significantly with complex, real-world data analysis tasks, falling far short of the performance required
for practical deployment.

1.4 QwenPaw-Data: Our Solution

To tackle the limitations of existing systems, we propose QwenPaw-Data, an agentic data system
built specifically for enterprise data analysis scenarios. QwenPaw-Data consolidates the multi-
source, multi-modal, and heterogeneous enterprise data, scattered across enterprise data warehouses,
dashboards, business documents, interaction logs, and document knowledge bases, into reusable,
governable, and evolvable analysis assets. Building on these assets, a user only needs to ask questions
in natural language to interact with the agent to autonomously complete the end-to-end pipeline that
spans data understanding, data retrieval, data analysis, report production, and ultimately decision
support. At the same time, this system is strongly self-evolving, so every piece of user feedback and
behavior helps it improve over time.
Unlike those systems, QwenPaw-Data is natively designed and implemented to resolve these chal-
lenges. It reaches this not through a stronger model, but with delicate harness techniques to decompose
each of the three difficulties onto a component. In addition, we carefully define the interaction logic
between them, enabling them to collaborate smoothly to tune every analysis into reusable assets. This
gives QwenPaw-Data the following data-centric highlights that general-purpose and coding agents
lack:

       • Trustworthy Semantic Grounding System. QwenPaw-Data grounds every analysis in
         governed, graph-structured semantic evidence rather than prompt-level guessing, mapping
         ambiguous business concepts to the right data entities and eliminating data hallucination at
         its source.
       • Codified Analytical Methodology Hub. QwenPaw-Data supplies reusable, verifiable
         analytical skills that encode how an expert analyzes, so answers follow a reproducible
         methodology instead of ad-hoc, one-off reasoning.
       • Controllable Long-horizon Execution Environment. QwenPaw-Data orchestrates long-
         running, artifact-centric workflows with isolated SQL and Python execution, keeping every
         step traceable, verifiable, and open to mid-execution intervention rather than a restart.
       • Self-Evolving Data Assets. Across all components in QwenPaw-Data, semantics, methods,
         and experience are deposited as governable, evolvable assets, so the system keeps improving
         the more it is used.

With QwenPaw-Data, enterprises can cover the serious analytical work a data team handles day to
day, including but not limited to,

       • Business monitoring and anomaly diagnosis. Track core metrics such as DAU, revenue,
         or conversion, and when one moves unexpectedly, automatically pinpoint which region,
         channel, or segment drove it.
       • Trend and growth analysis. Analyze the access, retention, or conversion trend of a product,
         identify turning points, and attribute the changes behind them.
       • User and interaction insight. Mine large volumes of dialogue and behavior logs to
         understand user intent, needs, and how they shift over time.
       • Periodic business reporting. Produce end-to-end monthly or quarterly reports for a product
         or business line, from data retrieval to a finished, decision-ready document.


                                                   5
            Table 2: Comparison of representative data agent systems over four dimensions.
                                          Semantic                  Analytical            Execution               Self-
System                                    Grounding                Methodology           Capabilities           Evolution

Oracle Analytics AI Agents                     ✗                       ✗                       ✗                     ✗
Microsoft Fabric Data Agent                    ✔                       ✗                       ✗                     ✗
QuickSight / Cognos / Intelligent Q /
                                               ✗
                                               ✔                       ✗
                                                                       ✔                       ✔                     ✗
BigQuery Analytics / Volcengine Agent
Databricks Genie Agent                         ✔                       ✔                       ✔                     ✗
                                                                                                                     ✔
QwenPaw-Data                                   ✔                       ✔                       ✔                     ✔
                                           ✗ partial, restricted, or insufficiently documented support; ✗ no explicit support or
Notation: ✔ explicit system-level support; ✔
support limited to predefined functions.



         • Ad-hoc deep-dive analysis. Answer open questions such as “why did product X’s revenue
           drop last month?” with multi-dimensional decomposition and contribution attribution.

Across all of these, QwenPaw-Data does not stop at returning a number: it grounds every metric
in the right business definition, follows an expert analytical methodology, and delivers traceable,
decision-ready results. By our evaluation (see Section 6), QwenPaw-Data substantially outperforms
strong general-purpose agents on open-ended tasks and public benchmarks.


1.5    Comparison with Existing Systems

To position QwenPaw-Data within the current data-agent landscape, we also review and compare
representative systems and commercial products across four key dimensions: semantic grounding,
analytical methodology, execution capabilities, and self-evolution (discussed in Section 1.3.1 and
Section 1.4). Table 2 presents a comparison over representative industrial systems across these four
dimensions.
Oracle Analytics AI Agents [Oracle, 2026] and Microsoft Fabric Data Agent [Microsoft, 2026a] are
comparatively assistant-oriented, but use different grounding mechanisms. Oracle configures agents
through datasets, supplemental instructions, and knowledge documents, without exposing a standalone
ontology or reusable skills. Microsoft Fabric Data Agent can use Fabric IQ Ontology [Microsoft,
2026b] for governed semantic grounding; however, its standalone runtime remains query-centric,
selecting data sources and generating read-only SQL, DAX, or KQL, with limited support for more
complex planning and reusable analytical skills.
Amazon QuickSight [Amazon, 2026], IBM Cognos Analytics Assistant [IBM, 2026], Alibaba Quick
BI Intelligent Q [Alibaba Cloud, 2026], Google BigQuery Conversational Analytics [Google, 2026],
and Volcengine Intelligent Analytics Agent [Volcengine, 2026] represent a conversational-BI design
center, supporting natural-language question answering, insight generation, dashboard construction,
and report creation. They typically rely on platform-native semantic assets—such as topics, semantic
models, datasets, dashboard metadata, or warehouse governance objects—to translate business
questions into BI queries and reports. This design is effective for lowering the interaction barrier
within a specific BI platform, but semantic grounding remains coupled to platform-local assets rather
than being organized as a cross-system evidence substrate. Analytical procedures are also exposed
mainly through built-in BI capabilities, configured workflows, or prompt instructions, rather than
reusable and verifiable method assets.
Databricks Genie Agents [Databricks, 2026a] is closest to QwenPaw-Data in overall direction, com-
bining an automatically maintained Genie Ontology [Databricks, 2026b] with multi-step analytical
execution and reusable skills. However, while its ontology evolves continuously, its analytical skills
do not support persistent self-evolution.
In contrast, QwenPaw-Data provides explicit system-level support across all four dimensions, inte-
grating governed semantic grounding, reusable analytical methodologies, controllable execution, and
persistent self-evolution within a unified architecture.


                                                               6
                                                                    User


                                              Web UI                                     CLI


             Host
                      Materialize            Dispatch                 Execute              Reflect                  Recover

                                    Skill                                                             MCP
             Skill-Hub                                                DataBridge
                 Hierarchical Skills                                          Semantic Management Lifecycle

                         L0: Routing          Skill     Context       Build     Store          Retrieve     Learn          Govern
                         L1: Planning       Evolution
            Default                                                                     Semantic Substrate
                         L2: Composite
            Runtime                                                     Metadata               Trace           Knowledge
                         L3: Atomic                                      Graph                 Graph             Graph


             Raw Data
                         Databases                      Documents                       Workflows                    ...



                           Figure 1: The architecture overview of QwenPaw-Data.


2     QwenPaw-Data Architecture

2.1   Design Principle

The design principle of QwenPaw-Data is to decompose enterprise data analysis according to the
core questions an AI-native data agent must answer: what evidence to trust, what analytical method
to follow, and how to execute the resulting workflow in a controllable way. A loose analogy can be
drawn to how enterprise analysis teams collaborate across data modeling, BI (Business Intelligence)
methodology, and execution infrastructure.
This decomposition directly responds to the three difficulties identified in Section 1.3.1: grounding
business concepts in the right data calls for an evidence-grounding subsystem; codifying analytical
methodology calls for a method-orchestration subsystem; and sustaining long-horizon execution calls
for an execution-control subsystem. Accordingly, QwenPaw-Data decomposes an intelligent data
analysis system into three decoupled modules with orthogonal responsibilities:

       • DataBridge — evidence grounding. It answers what facts to use: it grounds business
         semantics, tracks staleness, and retrieves the minimum sufficient evidence for each task.
         Intuitively, it plays a role close to the semantic and modeling support provided by data
         warehouse teams.
       • Skill-Hub — method orchestration. It answers how to analyze: it standardizes reusable
         analytical methods, workflows, procedural conventions, and quality expectations. Intuitively,
         it resembles the methodological and reporting expertise accumulated by BI teams.
       • Host — execution control. It answers how to run: it materializes workflows as DAGs,
         isolates SQL and Python execution in sandboxes, invokes tools and subagents, and manages
         artifacts, traces, and recovery. Intuitively, it reflects the execution and infrastructure support
         usually provided by data/platform engineering teams.

Although many systems bundle evidence and methods into a single knowledge store, we keep
DataBridge and Skill-Hub separate because they hold orthogonal knowledge: DataBridge captures
volatile, domain-specific business facts (schemas, metrics, entities), while Skill-Hub captures sta-
ble, domain-general analytical methods. Merging them would bind each method to one domain,
unable to transfer elsewhere or survive routine schema changes. Separating what facts to use from
how to analyze instead lets one skill run over different evidence and lets evidence update without


                                                                  7
rewriting methods. Our ablation (Section 6.2) confirms that removing either module causes a marked
performance drop.

2.2   System Overview

Figure 1 illustrates the overall architecture of QwenPaw-Data. At the bottom, enterprise data assets
are heterogeneous by nature: analytical tables, documents, searchable knowledge, historical traces,
and operational data are scattered across different storage systems. DataBridge turns these scattered
sources into a governed semantic substrate. Concretely, it organizes three graphs: the Metadata Graph
(MG) describes databases, tables, columns, metrics, dimensions, and lineage; the Knowledge Graph
(KG) captures business entities, definitions, rules, and organizational context; and the Trace Graph
(TG) records task traces, tool usage, intermediate artifacts, user feedback, and reusable experience.
Downstream components do not retrieve raw fragments directly; they request task-specific semantic
evidence from DataBridge.
Skill-Hub sits above this semantic substrate as the method subsystem. It organizes reusable skills
into several categories. Routing skills identify user intent and dispatch it to the appropriate skills,
and planning skills decompose a request into an executable analytical plan (a DAG). Workflow skills
chain multiple atomic skills into end-to-end pipelines such as data fetching and metric analysis, while
atomic skills package single reusable operations such as anomaly detection, dimensional drill-down,
and report generation. Cross-cutting categories complement these, including runtime skills that
encode execution-time behavioral guidelines and a meta skill that document how to use Skill-Hub
itself. Importantly, Skill-Hub does not execute these skills by itself; it provides skill specifications,
references, and scripts that Host can interpret and run. The same skills consume semantic evidence
from DataBridge rather than encoding changing business facts inside the skill itself, which keeps
analytical methods reusable across domains.
Host is the runtime subsystem that makes the semantic and methodological subsystems executable. It
reads the skill specifications, references, and scripts provided by Skill-Hub, turns them into a DAG
execution graph, schedules independent branches in parallel, exposes tools for SQL, Python, file
operations, and report construction, runs tool calls inside isolated sandboxes, and maintains an artifact
registry that links each intermediate result back to its producing action.
The three modules interact through two standard interfaces rather than ad hoc coupling: Host reaches
DataBridge over the Model Context Protocol [Anthropic, 2024], treating it as an MCP server that
serves task-specific evidence on demand; and it consumes Skill-Hub through the open Agent Skills
standard [Agent Skills, 2026], which both Skill-Hub and Host adhere to, so the two sides align
without custom integration code.

2.3   An End-to-End Walkthrough

Figure 2 traces a single request—“analyze the average GAAP value of valid users for product
X”—through the system, showing how DataBridge, Skill-Hub, and Host collaborate during a real
analytical task.

Planning. The user first asks the question in natural language. Host consults Skill-Hub to select
the relevant routing and planning skills, then uses their specifications and references to decompose
the request into a DAG-shaped workflow: fetch data, detect anomalies, drill down by user type and
region in parallel, conduct causal analysis, and generate the final report. Host materializes this plan
as an executable DAG, keeps the plan inspectable, and waits for the user’s approval or revision before
running it. DataBridge can already participate at this stage by supplying high-level semantic hints
that constrain what metrics, entities, and dimensions the plan should consider.

Data retrieval. Once execution starts, the first question is not how to write SQL, but what the
business terms mean. DataBridge resolves “valid users” through the Knowledge Graph and locates
the GAAP metric through the Metadata Graph, linking the logical definition to the physical table and
column. Host then invokes the corresponding data-access tools and executes the generated SQL in a
sandboxed environment against the underlying warehouse. The resulting dataset is registered as an
artifact, so later conclusions can be traced back to the exact query, source, and previewed rows.


                                                   8
          Analyze GAAP Val. of My Product for Valid Users
                                                                                Anomaly Detection
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Oh! We just started serving west-region users. I
            How to perform analysis?
                                                                                  Find anomaly point by running`detect_anomalies.py` from skill Anomaly Detection                                  want to inspect: first, avg GAAP/user; second, 30-
                                                                                                                                                                                                   day retention; third, trial-to-paid conversion (paid
                                                                                                                       One anomaly detected: exceptionally high GAAP 50K at 3.10                   users / total trial users, excluding internal tests &
             Intent      Build     Fetch     Build                                                                                                                                    Sandbox
             Router      Plan      Data      Report        Skill-Hub                                                                                                                                            pre-billing cancellations).
             Anomaly         Dimension     Causal ...
             Detection       DrillDown     Analysis
                                                                               Drill Down by User Type                                      Drill Down by User Region

          Here's the plan! Ready to execute upon your                                                                                          Compute contribution by user region. The            I will follow the user's instruction
                                                                                   Compute contribution by user types
          approval, or revise based on your feedback                                                                                           data is irregular, write and run .py script:
                                                                                   (e.g., student / engineer / ...) via script
                  Fetch Data                                                                                                                   ``` df['region']=clean_region(df['region'])
                                                                                   `cal_contri.py` from skill Drill Down                                                                           Fetch Data
                 Anomaly Detection                                                                                                                res = df.groupby('region')['contri'].sum() ```
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Pull west-region users, tags, activation
                       Drill Down by Dim A & B in parallel                    Student users contributed 70% (35K GAAP),                   North region contributed 65% (32.5K GAAP),                   timestamps, and trial/payment records with
                       Causal Analysis                                        Engineer users contributed 10% (5K GAAP),                    East region contributed 35% (17.5K GAAP),                                  exclusion lists
                       From Dim A & B in Parallel                                                  ...                Sandbox                                   ...                 Sandbox
                      Report Generation
                                                                                                                                                                                                   New Dimension Analysis
                                                                               Causal Analysis from User Type                               Causal Analysis from User Region                        Compute avg GAAP/user by segment and 30-day
                OK! Go Ahead~
                                                                                                                                                                                                         retention to pinpoint day-7 drop-off.
                                                                                   What caused the Student GAAP                                What caused the North user GAAP
                                                                                          spike on 3.10?                                                spike on 3.10?
      Fetch Data                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Skill-Hub Evolve
                  How is a valid user defined?                                                                                                                                                               Intent       Build      Fetch       Build
                                                                                      Knowledge Graph Linkage                                      Knowledge Graph Linkage                                   Router       Plan       Data        Report   Skill-Hub
                                                                                                  3.8 Annual student      Data-                                                                              Anomaly         Dimension       Causal ...
               Knowledge Graph Linkage                                                                                                                                3.7 North
                                                                                      3.10            subscription        Bridge                   3.10                                   Data-              Detection       DrillDown       Analysis
                                                                                                                                                                      enterprise
                                                           DataBridge                                   renewal                                                                           Bridge
                                                                                                       campaign
                                                                                                                                                                   contract renewal                      +       New Dimension Analysis (NEW)
                Valid User       YTD GAAP >= 10
                                                                                     Student                                                     North Region

      Valid user means Fiscal Year-to-Date GAAP >= 10                          Student GAAP spike on 3.10 driven by annual                   North GAAP spike on 3.10 driven by regional
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Conversion Rate Calculation
                                                                              subscription renewal campaign launched on 3.8               enterprise contract renewal batch processed on 3.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Derive net trial-to-paid conversion after filtering
                 Where to find GAAP data?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        exclusions.

               Metadata Graph Linkage                                            Report Generation                                                                                                                                DataBridge Learn
                      GAAP                                                                                                                                                                                   Knowledge Graph Linkage
                                     Table:               DataBridge                Build an interactive report with all
                                   dws_gaap_di                                        visualizations and conclusions                                                                                            Conversion Analysis
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          DataBridge
                       Col: gaap_val                                                 substantiated by verifiable data                                                                                                      Excluding internal
                                                                                     sources, referencing skill report                                                                                                +    tests & pre-billing
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             cancellations
                                                                                                 generation

        Run SQL `SELECT user, gaap_val from
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Report Generation
         dws_gaap_di where ...` to fetch data                                       read_file ('report_generation/SKILL.md')                                                                         Summarize the three KPIs with root causes,
                                                               DB                                                                                                                                  methodologies, and source links in an html report.
                                                                                    read_file ('report_generation/reference/layout.md')
       1032 rows selected. Preview first 20 rows:
       user, gaap_val                                                                                  ...
                                                        Hologres PostgreSQL
       Alice, 223
       ...                                                                          write_file ('report.html', content="...")
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Sandbox
       All data is available at table gaap_tmp          MaxCompute   SQLite                                                                                                            Sandbox




              Figure 2: Illustration of how QwenPaw-Data empowers enterprise operations analytics.


Analysis. During analysis, Host follows the reusable skill assets from Skill-Hub, including scripts
and references for anomaly detection, dimensional drill-down, contribution calculation, and causal
analysis. Host schedules independent branches of the DAG in parallel, for example, user-type and
region drill-downs can run concurrently, and runs their scripts and tool calls inside an isolated sandbox
environment. During attribution, DataBridge continues to provide grounded evidence from KG,
linking observed metric changes to business events rather than letting the model guess from prompt
context alone.

Report generation. After the analytical branches converge, Host uses the report-generation skill
package from Skill-Hub to organize findings, charts, and methods into an interactive report. Each
chart and conclusion in the report links back to its underlying data source, which can be downloaded
and audited.

Self-evolution. Beyond delivering a report, each completed task feeds back to evolve the system.
In our example, the user follows up with a new analysis demand, such as adding a new dimension,
and confirms refined metric definitions. Host executes these follow-up instructions and captures the
resulting execution trace. These signals then feed back into the two asset subsystems: Skill-Hub
turns the newly requested procedure into a candidate reusable skill, and DataBridge promotes the
confirmed definitions and validated semantic corrections into KG. In this way, a completed task
becomes reusable experience for the next similar analysis.

2.4          How to Use QwenPaw-Data

QwenPaw-Data provides two usage modes: ChatWeb and CLI/SDK. ChatWeb targets interactive
business analysis, while CLI/SDK targets platform integration and secondary development.

ChatWeb. In ChatWeb mode, QwenPaw-Data is delivered as a plugin on top of QwenPaw [Alibaba
Group, 2026], a general-purpose agent platform, and reuses its conversational frontend, so an existing
chat interface is extended with data-analysis capabilities without rebuilding the interaction layer.
The frontend is further adapted for data workloads, for example to visualize the parallel DAG task
plan and to track long-running, multi-step analyses, as shown in Figure 3. Through ChatWeb, users
submit analytical requests in natural language, inspect the generated plan, track task progress, view
intermediate artifacts, and continue refining the analysis in the same conversation. This mode suits
business users and analysts who need an interactive data-analysis experience.


                                                                                                                                    9
    Figure 3: The ChatWeb interface of QwenPaw-Data, delivered as a plugin on top of QwenPaw.




CLI/SDK. CLI/SDK mode is designed for platform integration and secondary development.
QwenPaw-Data exposes its core capabilities, including intent understanding, task planning, and
workflow execution, through a lightweight command-line interface, so it can be embedded into
existing enterprise BI platforms without a dedicated web frontend. Developers can extend data
sources, register new tools, customize analytical skills, and define domain-specific semantic rules. As
a result, QwenPaw-Data can be seamlessly embedded into existing enterprise data platforms, internal
BI systems, workflow engines, or other service environments, serving as an infrastructure layer for
building customized data agents.



3     DataBridge

3.1    Role: The Semantic Evidence Subsystem

DataBridge is the semantic evidence subsystem of QwenPaw-Data. Its responsibility is to turn
fragmented enterprise data, business knowledge, and historical task experience into governed evidence
that Host can retrieve and use during analytical execution. This is the component that supports
trustworthy semantic grounding: instead of asking the model to infer from prompt-level context,
DataBridge exposes verified, traceable, and governable evidence for each task.
This role is necessary because enterprise analysis is an open-form task. Business concepts are
ambiguous, metric definitions change over time, and useful experience is scattered across past tasks,
documents, data models, and user feedback. DataBridge therefore does not behave like a generic text
retriever. It maintains a semantic evidence substrate that can be built from heterogeneous sources,
stored with provenance and validity, retrieved as task-specific context, improved from feedback, and
governed when definitions become stale or conflicting.
Figure 4 provides the high-level map of DataBridge. The center represents the semantic substrate that
stores different kinds of evidence, while the surrounding lifecycle explains how evidence enters the
system, becomes retrievable, returns to Host during task execution, and evolves through feedback and
governance. The rest of this section follows this logic: we first introduce what kinds of information
DataBridge manages, then explain how the lifecycle operates over them.


                                                  10
                                                                                      Build
                                                                           construct candidate evidence



                                                                  Semantic Evidence Store


                     Govern                                                                                                                          Store
             control evidence quality and                                                                                                   instantiate evidence as
                                                        Metadata                     Trace                    Knowledge
                        access                                                                                                                   graph assets
                                                       Graph (MG)                  Graph (TG)                 Graph (KG)
                                                    data assets, metrics          execution traces            business rules
                                                      and semantics               and experience              and knowledge




                                                      Learn                                                       Retrieve
                                            convert usage into reusable                                   assemble task-specific evidence
                                                     evidence



Figure 4: The overall structure of DataBridge. The center shows the semantic evidence stores, while
the outer loop shows how evidence is built, stored, retrieved, learned, and governed.


3.2     What DataBridge Manages

Before introducing the storage structure, it is useful to clarify what kinds of information DataBridge
manages. In enterprise analysis, the evidence needed by an agent is not a single document or table
schema, but a combination of three information types.

Data semantics. Data semantics describes the structure and meaning of data assets: databases,
tables, columns, metrics, dimensions, lineage, partitions, and data-source relationships. In the GAAP
use case of Figure 2, this information tells Host where the GAAP metric is physically stored, how it
maps to the underlying table and column, which product and time fields must be used, and which
analytical dimensions such as user type or region are available for drill-down.

Business knowledge. Business knowledge captures concepts and rules that are not fully encoded
in schemas. It includes business entities, metric definitions, operational rules, policies, events, and
external definitions. In the same use case, this is where DataBridge represents the definition of “valid
users,” GAAP-related business rules, and business events such as subscription-renewal campaigns
that may explain metric changes.

Task experience. Task experience records what has happened in previous analytical tasks: execution
traces, tool calls, intermediate artifacts, successful analysis paths, failed attempts, user corrections,
and reusable lessons. For recurring GAAP analyses, this information helps the system remember
which drill-down branches were useful, which scripts or tool calls produced reliable evidence, which
assumptions users corrected, and which historical traces should be reused during attribution.

3.3     Semantic Evidence Lifecycle

DataBridge manages the three information types through a five-stage lifecycle: Build, Store, Retrieve,
Learn, and Govern. The lifecycle is designed to separate evidence construction from evidence use:
information is first collected and normalized, then instantiated as governed graph assets, retrieved
as task-specific context, improved from usage, and continuously controlled before it can influence
future analytical execution. Figure 5 illustrates this lifecycle with the GAAP analysis example, which
we follow throughout this subsection.

3.3.1    Build: Construct Candidate Evidence
The Build stage converts heterogeneous enterprise sources into candidate semantic evidence. Its
input includes structured metadata from warehouses and metric systems, semi-structured knowledge
from documents and dashboards, and behavioral signals from historical tasks, reports, intermediate
artifacts, user feedback, and failure records. These sources are collected together because enterprise
analysis usually depends on evidence scattered across systems rather than on a single schema or
document.


                                                                                       11
                                                                                                           Find GAAP data for valid user                                     Metadata Graph                                              Metadata Graph
                                                        Metadata
                                                         Meta    Graph
                                                              Graph
                                                                                                                                                                GAAP                                                         GAAP
                                     GAAP                                     user region                                                                                            TrialToPaid
                                                                user type                                                                                                                          is_paid                               gaap_val
                                                                                                                                                                gaap_val                                                                                        is_paid
                                                                                                 (1)Search                                                                     uid
                                     gaap_val           uid                                            GAAP                                user region                                                                   gaap_val_new
                                                                         type                                                 user type                                                  user_id ads_user_trial
 Hologres MaxCompute                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   user_id ads_user_trial
                                                                                 region                                                                       trans_id                                                     trans_id
                                                               user_id
                                                                                      reg_date         gaap_val      uid               type                                                            dim_user
                                   trans_id      date                                                                                                              dws_gaap_di                                                  dws_gaap_di                         dim_user
                                        dws_gaap_di                  dim_user                                                                 region                                                                       Sync to DB changes
                                                                                                                             user_id
                                                                                                     trans_id                                      reg_date                  Knowledge Graph
 PostgreSQL     SQLite                  metric       dimension           table      column                         date
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Knowledge Graph
                                                                                                          dws_gaap_di             dim_user                               Product X            competitor Product Y
                                                   Knowledge Graph                                                                                                                                 3.1 sales promotion                Product X             competitor Product Y
                                                                                                                                                               valid user
                                                Product X             competitor Product Y                                              (2)Fusion                                                                           valid user
 Knowledge      Business                                                                                    Product X           competitor Product Y
                                                                                                                                                                                         conversion analysis
   Base          Report                                                  3.1 sales promotion
                                   valid user                                                                                      3.1 sales promotion        YTD GAAP >= 10             excluding pre-billing                                        conversion analysis
                                                  3.7 north                3.8 student            valid user                                                                                 cancellations                   Back-to-Study            excluding pre-billing
                                                                           subscription                          3.7 north          3.8 student                                                                              Renewal at 3.1
                                                  contract                                                                                                                                                                                                cancellations
                                                                             renewal                             contract           subscription
                                   YTD GAAP >= 10 renewal                                                                                                                        Trace Graph                               Integrate user uploaded meeting notes
                                                                                                  YTD GAAP >= 10 renewal              renewal
  Temporary       Web                         concept            caliber           event
     File                                                                                                                                                     MoM change in GAAP GAAP for Valid User                                          Trace Graph
                                                         Trace Graph                                                                                                                            skip weekend noise         MoM change in GAAP GAAP for Valid User
                                                                                                                                                                          fetch GAAP              when detection
                                                  MoM change in GAAP                                   MoM change in GAAP per user type
                                                                                                                                                                         and user data               anomalies                                               skip weekend noise
                                        fetch GAAP                                                   fetch GAAP                                                                                                                                                when detecting
                                                                 left join dws_gaap_di and                                 left join dws_gaap_di and                        anomaly detection                                    x     fetch GAAP
                                       and user data                                                and user data                                                                                                                                                 anomalies
                                                                  dim_user is very efficient                                dim_user is very efficient                                                                                and user data
                                       compute mom                                                  compute mom
                                                                      generate dashboard                                       generate dashboard                New chat: Analyze GAAP Val for Valid Users and                          anomaly detection
       Chat History                       task                step              experience                                                                                  inspect new west user ...                      Discard outdated trace

                           Build                              Store                                                        Retrieve                                                   Learn                                                   Govern



Figure 5: The semantic evidence lifecycle of DataBridge on the GAAP use case, spanning five stages:
Build ingests and normalizes heterogeneous sources, Store instantiates them as three semantically
interconnected graphs, Retrieve assembles task-specific evidence via cross-graph search and fusion,
Learn distills new metrics, rules, and experiences from usage, and Govern keeps the evidence reliable.


The main function of Build is normalization. DataBridge extracts candidate entities, relations,
definitions, and traces from raw sources, aligns them to the three information types, and attaches
source information and preliminary confidence signals. At this stage, the output is not yet trusted
graph knowledge; it is candidate evidence prepared for graph storage and later governance. In the
GAAP use case, Build may extract a candidate GAAP metric from warehouse schemas, capture
the business concept of “valid user” from business reports and knowledge bases, and mine reusable
experience from chat history, such as the observation that left joining dws gaap di with dim user
is efficient. Together, these candidates later help the LLM understand what “GAAP for valid users”
actually refers to, where the underlying data lives, and how to retrieve it efficiently, so that similar
analyses can reuse this evidence instead of rediscovering everything from scratch.

3.3.2                 Store: Instantiate Evidence as Graph Assets
The Store stage turns candidate evidence into persistent graph assets. It does not simply archive the
three information types; it instantiates them as typed nodes, typed edges, and cross-graph links that
can be retrieved and governed:

                 • Metadata Graph (MG) represents data assets as schema-level nodes, such as databases,
                   tables, columns, metrics, dimensions, and partitions. Edges encode structural and semantic
                   relations, such as table–column containment, metric–column mapping, metric–dimension
                   compatibility, and lineage between upstream and downstream assets.
                 • Knowledge Graph (KG) represents business knowledge as concept-level nodes, such as
                   business entities, metric definitions, rules, policies, events, and external concepts. Edges
                   encode relations such as definition, constraint, scope, temporal applicability, and links from
                   business concepts back to the MG assets that implement them.
                 • Trace Graph (TG) represents task experience as execution-level nodes, such as tasks, plans,
                   tool calls, intermediate artifacts, reports, feedback, and corrections. Edges encode how an
                   analysis was executed, including which action produced which artifact, which evidence
                   was used, which branch succeeded or failed, and which user correction updated MG or KG
                   evidence.

Each node and edge is stored with governance metadata, including provenance, trust level, temporal
validity, lifecycle state, and visibility. This metadata is part of the graph representation itself, so
downstream retrieval can distinguish verified, outdated, conflicting, or restricted evidence. In the
GAAP use case, Store turns these candidates into typed nodes and edges, each supporting a later step.
In MG, the dws gaap di table contains the gaap val column that the GAAP metric maps to, which
grounds data retrieval, and the metric stays compatible with the user type and region dimensions used
for drill-down analysis. In KG, the “valid user” calibration YTD GAAP ≥ 10 fixes the filter applied
when fetching data, while renewal events such as the student-subscription campaigns feed the later
causal analysis. In TG, the prior task, its steps, and its artifacts, together with the reusable experience


                                                                                                                                              12
distilled by the Learn stage (Section 3.3.4), speed up a follow-up similar request with the efficient
join it already found.

3.3.3   Retrieve: Assemble Task-Specific Evidence
The Retrieve stage assembles the minimum sufficient evidence needed by a concrete task. Given
the user request, current plan, and session state from Host, DataBridge anchors task mentions to
graph nodes instead of retrieving raw text chunks. It then expands task-specific subgraphs across
MG, KG, and TG, fuses the selected evidence, and returns a structured context package or concise
natural-language answer back to Host.
The design goal of Retrieve is precision under governance. MG contributes concrete data assets
and valid analytical dimensions; KG contributes business definitions, rules, scopes, and events; TG
contributes prior execution experience, reusable paths, and known pitfalls. Retrieve combines these
signals while respecting provenance, validity, visibility, and conflict status, so Host receives evidence
that is compact enough to act on and reliable enough to ground execution. In the GAAP use case,
for a request such as “find GAAP data for valid users,” Retrieve anchors three mentions to graph
nodes: the GAAP metric in MG, the “valid user” concept together with the current product in KG,
and the prior fetch-data step in TG. Each anchor then expands outward into the semantically related
context around it, and the resulting subgraphs are fused across layers, for instance by linking the
dws gaap di and dim user tables in MG to the join experience carried by that fetch-data step in
TG. Together they assemble a compact yet complete context, so Host works from grounded, traceable
evidence.

3.3.4   Learn: Convert Usage into Reusable Evidence
The Learn stage turns real analytical usage into reusable evidence. It has two complementary
paths: online learning absorbs explicit feedback during task execution, such as user-confirmed
definitions, corrected rules, rejected assumptions, and report review comments; offline learning mines
accumulated traces for recurring patterns, stable metric–dimension relations, useful drill-down paths,
and verified failure modes.
The output of Learn is a set of candidate updates to MG, KG, or TG. These updates are intentionally
separated from direct execution. A correction may suggest a KG rule update, a repeated successful
workflow may suggest a TG experience pattern, and a verified metric–column relation may strengthen
an MG mapping. This preserves the boundary between DataBridge and Skill-Hub: DataBridge
evolves semantic evidence, traces, and rules, while Skill-Hub evolves reusable method assets such
as skill packages, references, and scripts. In the GAAP use case (Figure 2), Learn works on the
execution trace and explicit user feedback accumulated across the whole analysis, distilling three
candidate updates. The user’s definition of net conversion becomes a new trial-to-paid conversion
metric in MG, along with its supporting columns and table. A correction the user made turns into a
KG rule excluding pre-billing cancellations. The successful run, meanwhile, leaves TG a reusable
experience, skipping weekend noise during anomaly detection. Once promoted, DataBridge supplies
these updates as evidence for later requests, so the agent automatically conducts subsequent analyses
under the same definition, exclusion, and caveat; this reduces the attention the user must devote
to restating them and improves the efficiency of recurring analyses. Until promotion, they remain
candidates rather than one-off session notes.

3.3.5   Govern: Control Evidence Quality and Access
The Govern stage keeps the evidence layer reliable over time. It controls whether graph evidence is
allowed to affect retrieval and execution. DataBridge checks provenance, temporal validity, conflicts,
trust level, lifecycle state, and visibility; promotes validated candidate updates; deprecates stale nodes;
and prevents conflicting or unauthorized evidence from being used silently.
Govern is both an automated control process and a human-facing correction process. DataBridge
exposes visual governance interfaces for MG, KG, and TG, allowing users to inspect the three graphs
and directly create, update, or delete graph nodes, edges, rules, and trace records when human
correction is required. These operations update the governed evidence layer rather than patching a
single prompt or session. In the GAAP use case, Govern updates, adds, and removes evidence to
keep the three graphs aligned with reality. When an upstream schema change in the dws gaap di


                                                    13
table renames the GAAP column from gaap val to gaap val new, it updates MG by deprecating
the old field and redirecting to the new one, so that retrieval never binds to a dropped column. Also,
in response to user-uploaded meeting notes that surface a previously unrecorded campaign, it adds a
new Back-to-Study Renewal event to KG on March 1. And as time passes, a trace or experience in
TG that is no longer used or whose definition no longer holds is removed before it can mislead future
attribution. Through these operations, only current and trustworthy evidence reaches Retrieve, and
superseded or conflicting evidence never silently influences execution.

3.4   What DataBridge Guarantees

Through the interaction of the three information types and the five-stage lifecycle, DataBridge
provides three guarantees for QwenPaw-Data:
       • Groundedness: business concepts are mapped to verified graph evidence rather than inferred
         from prompt context.
       • Freshness: definitions, schemas, and business rules carry validity and lifecycle state, so stale
         evidence can be detected and governed.
       • Evolvability: user feedback, execution traces, and confirmed corrections become reusable
         semantic assets for future tasks.
Together, these guarantees allow Host to execute analytical workflows over governed evidence rather
than over fragmented, unverified context.

4     Skill-Hub
4.1   Role: The Method Asset Subsystem

Skill-Hub is the method asset subsystem of QwenPaw-Data. Its responsibility is to turn reusable
analytical methodology into structured skill assets that Host can interpret and execute during data-
analysis tasks. Skill-Hub answers how to analyze: the analytical method a task should follow, the
operations each step involves, the intermediate artifacts it should produce, and the criteria for checking
the result.
This role is necessary because sound data analysis relies on expert methodology that a model cannot
reliably reinvent for every task. Skill-Hub therefore packages this methodology as structured assets,
including skill specifications, references, and scripts. It does not execute these assets itself but leaves
their interpretation and execution to Host. Because each asset carries explicit inputs, outputs, expected
artifacts, and evaluation criteria, it also serves as a soft verification loop that partially compensates
for the lack of compiler- or test-based feedback in data analysis.
To fulfill this role, Skill-Hub is built along two axes, summarized in Figure 6: a hierarchy that
decomposes analytical methodology from task routing down to atomic operations, and an evolution
loop that keeps these method assets updated through evaluation, historical traces, and user feedback.
The rest of this section describes the assets Skill-Hub manages, this hierarchy, and how skills are
validated and evolved.

4.2   What Skill-Hub Manages

The basic unit Skill-Hub manages is a skill, which is more than a single prompt or script. Following
the Agent Skills standard [Agent Skills, 2026], each skill is packaged from a skill specification,
references, and scripts, together forming a reusable method package that Host can interpret and that
DataBridge can ground with evidence.

Skill specifications. Skill specifications, typically written in SKILL.md, define the structured
contract and procedural logic of an analytical method. They describe the task types a skill applies to,
the semantic evidence it expects from DataBridge, the inputs Host should provide, and the outputs
and artifacts that should be produced. More importantly, this is where the analysis workflow is
specified: the procedure steps, step dependencies, branching conditions, revision points, and quality
expectations are all described at the method level. Host then interprets this specification, materializes
the workflow as an executable DAG, and manages the actual execution.


                                                    14
                         Hierarchical Skills                                         Skill Evolution
                                           L0: Routing
                                          classify user intent and
                                        selects the proper skill path                   Execution Trace

                                                                         Skill-Hub                        User Feedback
                                           L1: Planning                                  Evolved Skills
                   Default:              decompose the task into
                                                                        Online
                                        an executable analysis plan
                   Runtime
                     provide the                                        Offline
                  shared execution        L2: Workflow
                   protocol for all     coordinate atomic skills and
                        skills            instantiate a workflow

                                                                                                          Evolved Skills
                                                                         Skill-Hub
                                            L3: Atomic                                 LLM Rollouts
                                      implement reusable fine-grained
                                           analytical operations




Figure 6: Hierarchical skills and skill evolution in Skill-Hub. The left part shows the skill hierarchy
and the right part shows the offline and online evolution loops that turn traces and feedback into
versioned skill updates.


References. References hold the detailed material that individual skill steps rely on, such as report
layouts, visualization conventions, or the analysis methods used for different business types. Keeping
this detail out of the skill specification enables progressive disclosure: Host loads a reference only
when the corresponding step needs it, instead of injecting all method detail up front and diluting the
LLM’s attention.

Scripts. Scripts package standard computations, such as common statistical routines, metric calcu-
lations, and report helpers, into ready-to-call functions rather than code the model regenerates each
time. This keeps recurring operations standardized and stable across tasks and saves tokens, since
Host can invoke a tested function instead of synthesizing and reasoning through the code again. As
with the other assets, Skill-Hub only provides these scripts, and Host is responsible for executing
them.

4.3   Hierarchical Skill Organization

Skill-Hub organizes method assets into a hierarchy so that complex analytical workflows can be
composed from reusable parts. The hierarchy moves from coarse-grained task understanding down to
fine-grained analytical operations, and is complemented by cross-cutting skills that apply throughout
a task.

L0: Routing. Routing skills classify a user request into a task family. Common task families
include metadata query, data query, BI business analysis, data exploration, statistical modeling,
and report generation. The output is a task-family decision that Host uses to select the relevant
downstream skills when constructing the executable workflow.

L1: Planning. Planning skills decompose a task into an inspectable analytical plan. This typ-
ically includes identifying the analysis scenario, refining the required metrics, choosing analysis
perspectives, and specifying which evidence to request from DataBridge, guided by references such
as scenario-type and metric specifications. The output is a plan specification rather than an executed
plan; Host materializes it as a DAG and manages user inspection, revision, and execution.

L2: Workflow. Workflow skills chain multiple atomic skills into an end-to-end pipeline for a
task family, defining the sequence of steps and their dependencies. Representative workflows are
BI analyses such as metric, cohort, conversion, and retention analysis, with additional pipelines
covering supporting tasks like data fetching and modeling. Host usually materializes each pipeline
into executable DAG actions.

L3: Atomic. Atomic skills are the smallest reusable analytical operations and serve as building
blocks for workflows. They cover recurring operations such as adaptive thresholding and anomaly
detection, dimensional drill-down, attribution and causal analysis, clustering, comparison, conversion-
and retention-rate computation, distribution and funnel analysis, LTV analysis, and dashboard and


                                                                        15
report generation. Because each atomic skill carries only method, different workflows can reuse the
same skill with different evidence supplied by DataBridge.

Cross-cutting skills. Some skills apply across the hierarchy rather than at a single level. Runtime
skills encode execution-time behavioral guidelines, such as user-interaction strategy and semantic-
layer usage, that shape how any skill behaves during a task. Meta skills document how to use the skill
system itself and are loaded before a task begins, so the agent knows how to navigate and combine
the other skills.
This hierarchy balances consistency with reuse: high-level skills keep the overall analytical path
consistent, while atomic skills make common operations reusable across workflows. Because business
facts remain in DataBridge, the same method hierarchy can be reused across different data domains.

4.4   Skill Validation

Skill-Hub provides methodological control for open-form data analysis. Because most data analysis
has no deterministic test to confirm correctness, some form of methodological check is still needed.
Rather than hard-coding a fixed checklist into each skill, which would be rigid and incomplete,
QwenPaw-Data automatically derives a task-specific checklist from the skill specification, references,
expected artifacts, and current task context. These generated checklists make the analytical process
inspectable without turning the skill itself into a static list of checks.
At execution time, a reflection subagent runs against this checklist, examining whether the required
evidence has been retrieved, whether key assumptions have been stated, whether the expected
intermediate artifacts have been produced, whether the selected dimensions match the task intent,
and whether the final report links its conclusions back to supporting artifacts. Such validation does
not prove that a business conclusion is absolutely correct; rather, it confirms that the intended method
was followed in a reproducible and reviewable way. This gives Skill-Hub a soft verification loop that
partially compensates for the absence of compiler-like feedback in data analysis.

4.5   Skill Evolution

Skill-Hub evolves continuously so that analytical methods keep improving with real usage, forming
the method half of the data-asset flywheel alongside DataBridge: DataBridge accumulates semantic
evidence, traces, and rules, while Skill-Hub accumulates reusable methodology, workflow structures,
references, and scripts. Evolution draws on two sources of signal, offline traces and online feedback,
but neither changes an active skill directly; both only produce candidate revisions that become active
through governed, versioned promotion.

Offline evolution. Offline evolution mines benchmark tasks, historical cases, and rollout traces.
Stable patterns across successful cases surface reusable workflows, better decomposition strategies,
or common quality checks, while divergent or failed traces expose ambiguous decisions, missing
constraints, or failure-prone method choices. Both are collected as candidate skill revisions.

Online evolution. Online evolution draws on human-in-the-loop feedback during real tasks, where
users may correct a procedure, request an additional perspective, reject an assumption, or ask for a
different report structure. Such feedback becomes a candidate revision only when it reflects a reusable
analytical improvement rather than a one-off business fact.

Versioned promotion. Candidate revisions from either source do not take effect immediately. They
become active only after review, evaluation, and versioning, whether the change adds a new validation
signal, refines a planning template, updates a reference, improves a script, or introduces a new
workflow. Once promoted, a revision becomes a new skill version available to Host in future tasks,
recorded with what changed, why, which evidence or feedback triggered it, how it was evaluated, and
how it can be rolled back. This versioned, auditable process lets the method library keep evolving
without letting temporary feedback, local preferences, or unsafe rollouts silently change global
analytical behavior.


                                                  16
                               DataBridge                                       Skill-Hub
                                       evidence                                   skills & assets




                                 Host Runtime (Execution Layer)
                                           Specialized Subagents                                                  Materialize
                                                                                                                  build execuable DAG




                   Data-Fetcher                Analyst                 Reporter                Reflector
                   data access and            analysis and           dashboard and             checks and
                                                                                                                   Dispatch
                      retrieval                reasoning            report generation          verification
                                                                                                                    assign tasks to
                                                                                                                  subagents and tools


                                           Execution Substrate
                                                                                                                    Execute
                                                                                                                   run tools/scripts,
                                                                                                                   generate artifacts
                     Execution             Tools, Scripts,             Artifact             Events & Re-
                   Graph & State           and Sandbox                 Registry             covery Hooks
                  DAG, status, deps,       SQL, Python, and        plans, SQL, results,      lifecycle events,
                    and context             isolated exec              and reports            retries, resume       Reflect
                                                                                                                  validate method and
                                                                                                                  evidence consistency
                                           Cross-Cutting Gurantees
                    Controllability                    Verifiablity                       Robustness
                          explicit actions,                    artifacts and
                                                             checks linked to
                                                                                            isolation, retries,    Recover
                             state and                                                        and recovery        handle failures, retry
                           intervention                         execution
                                                                                                                      and resume



                              Artifacts & Reports                                 Execution Traces
                                verifiable outputs
                                linked to evidence                                 traces, logs, events



Figure 7: The overall structure of Host Runtime. DataBridge supplies governed evidence and Skill-
Hub supplies method assets, and Host materializes them through specialized subagents and a managed
execution substrate, driven by a runtime lifecycle that makes analytical execution controllable,
verifiable, and robust.


4.6   What Skill-Hub Guarantees

By codifying analytical methodology as reusable, hierarchical, and continuously validated assets,
Skill-Hub gives QwenPaw-Data three guarantees:
       • Reusability: because method is separated from changing business facts, the same skill
         applies across domains.
       • Methodological consistency: similar tasks follow the same stable, expert-designed proce-
         dures rather than one-off model reasoning.
       • Verifiable evolvability: skills keep improving from feedback and evaluation, but only through
         candidate revisions that are validated, versioned, and auditable before they take effect.
Together, these guarantees let Host execute analytical workflows that are not only grounded by
DataBridge but also guided by reusable, continuously improving methodology.

5     Host Runtime
5.1   Role: The Runtime Execution Subsystem

Host is the runtime execution subsystem of QwenPaw-Data and the only execution subject in its
design. DataBridge and Skill-Hub supply governed evidence and reusable methods, while Host
materializes these assets into executable analytical runs, turning workflow specifications into concrete
runtime actions such as task materialization, subagent dispatch, tool invocation, sandboxed execution,
artifact recording, reflection, and failure recovery. By making execution explicit as state, actions,
artifacts, and events, it realizes the Controllable Long-horizon Execution Environment highlighted in
Section 1.4.
As summarized in Figure 7, Host combines a set of specialized subagents and a managed execution
substrate (left) with a runtime lifecycle that turns method and evidence assets into executable,


                                                                                   17
inspectable, and recoverable workflows (right). The rest of this section describes the runtime objects
Host manages, this lifecycle, and the guarantees it provides.

5.2   What Host Manages

Host manages the execution substrate that lets evidence and methods be used safely in real tasks,
built from the following runtime objects.

Execution graph and runtime state. Host represents each task as a directed acyclic graph (DAG),
with executable actions as nodes and their dependencies as edges, a structure expressive enough to
capture arbitrarily complex analytical tasks. On top of this graph, Host maintains the task’s runtime
state, including the status of each action (ready, running, completed, failed, skipped, or awaiting
user revision) along with session context, action inputs and outputs, dependency status, retry state,
and the current position in the workflow. This explicit representation turns a long-running task from
something hidden inside a conversation into a process that is inspectable and easy to manage, recover,
and parallelize.

Specialized subagents. Host organizes complex analysis through multiple specialized subagents
rather than a single monolithic agent. A data-fetching subagent focuses on evidence-aware data
access and retrieval. An analysis subagent carries out the core analytical work of a task, such as
metric computation, drill-down, attribution, comparison, and constructing intermediate conclusions.
A report subagent turns verified findings, charts, and artifacts into an interactive report or dashboard.
A reflection subagent uses automatically generated checklists, derived from Skill-Hub assets and
task context, to inspect whether the execution process followed the expected method and whether the
final answer is supported by artifacts. Dividing work this way gives each subagent a focused context,
which keeps long analytical tasks reliable.

Tools, scripts, and sandboxes. The actual computation of a task runs through tools and scripts that
Skill-Hub supplies or references, covering operations such as SQL queries, Python data processing,
visualization, file handling, and report rendering. Rather than running them directly, Host executes
these tools and scripts inside isolated sandboxes with their own runtime environments and permission
boundaries. This lets a task use flexible computational tools while keeping the host runtime and other
sessions safe from unsafe side effects.

Artifact registry. Host maintains an artifact registry for the intermediate and final products of
execution, including but not limited to plans, SQL statements, query results, transformed datasets,
charts, execution logs, generated checklists, reflection results, and final reports. Each artifact links
back to the DAG node, tool invocation, and supporting evidence that produced it, so any conclusion
can be traced to the concrete operations behind it. Because artifacts persist in the registry, they can
also be referenced and reused across chat sessions instead of being regenerated, which improves
efficiency, especially for the results of large-scale data retrieval.

Runtime events and recovery hooks. Host emits runtime events at key execution stages such as
tool invocation, artifact generation, reflection, and failure handling, and exposes lifecycle hooks on
them. Combined with the per-node state recorded in the DAG, these hooks enable recovery and
user intervention. At a hook, Host can preserve completed upstream artifacts and retry, roll back, or
resume the affected nodes from a checkpoint instead of restarting the task, for example when a query
times out or a user revises the plan mid-run.

5.3   Runtime Execution Lifecycle

Host runs each analytical task through an execution lifecycle of five stages that turn method and
evidence assets into a controlled, inspectable execution process:
Materialize. Host first interprets the selected Skill-Hub workflow specification in light of the user
request and the evidence retrieved from DataBridge, then expands its procedure steps into concrete
actions, wires up the dependencies among them, and determines the inputs and intermediate artifacts
each action needs. The result is an executable DAG for the task.


                                                   18
Dispatch. Host then schedules the ready actions and routes each to the subagent or tool that fits
its type, so data-fetching, analytical, report- generation actions go to their corresponding subagents
while independent branches run in parallel once their dependencies are satisfied.
Execute. The dispatched actions run as tool calls and script execution inside sandboxes, and every
product they generate, such as SQL statements, query results, transformed datasets, charts, logs, and
draft reports, is written into the artifact registry and linked back to its DAG node.
Reflect. As actions complete, Host invokes the reflection subagent, which runs against a task-specific
checklist automatically generated from the relevant Skill-Hub specification, references, and expected
artifacts, checking whether the retrieved evidence, stated assumptions, intermediate artifacts, selected
dimensions, and final conclusions are consistent with the intended method.
Recover. When an action fails, is interrupted, or is revised by the user, Host uses runtime hooks and
persisted state to retry, branch, roll back, or resume the affected actions from a checkpoint, without
invalidating completed upstream artifacts.

5.4   What Host Guarantees

By turning method and evidence into execution that is explicit, traceable, and recoverable, Host gives
QwenPaw-Data three guarantees:

       • Controllability: execution unfolds as explicit actions, dependencies, state, and intervention
         points rather than as an opaque model conversation, so a task can be inspected and steered
         at any stage.
       • Verifiability: intermediate artifacts, tool calls, generated checklists, and reflection results
         all link back to the execution graph, so every conclusion can be traced to the evidence and
         operations that produced it.
       • Robustness: sandbox isolation, persisted state, and checkpoint-based recovery keep a local
         tool, script, or stream failure from collapsing the whole workflow.

Together, these guarantees let QwenPaw-Data execute open-form data-analysis tasks as durable,
inspectable, and recoverable workflows, grounded by DataBridge and guided by Skill-Hub.


6     Evaluation

Having presented the design of QwenPaw-Data, we now examine whether it delivers measurable
benefits in practice. Our evaluation is centered on two questions:

       • Q1. To what extent does QwenPaw-Data improve over a general-purpose agent in real
         enterprise analysis?
       • Q2. How does each of its components contribute to these gains?

To investigate these questions under realistic conditions rather than in a sandbox, we deployed
QwenPaw-Data within an internal business line, where it serves business-intelligence (BI) users
in their day-to-day analytical work and supplies the workloads used throughout this evaluation.
There, analysts issue genuine business requests over live enterprise data hosted in Hologres, whose
heterogeneity, ambiguity, and continual evolution reflect the difficulties discussed in Section 1.3.

6.1   Enterprise Gains over a General Agent

To answer the first question, we evaluate QwenPaw-Data on tasks drawn from the BI users’ daily
usage, which fall into two categories. The first consists of 29 objective queries, such as NL2SQL
and metric computation, each with an exact ground-truth answer. The second consists of 37 distinct
open-ended analytical queries, spanning business metric monitoring and anomaly diagnosis, trend and
growth analysis, periodic business reporting, and ad-hoc deep-dive attribution; each is a long-horizon
task that requires from roughly 15 minutes to one hour of autonomous execution and culminates in a
report.


                                                  19
 Table 3: Component ablation on production BI tasks. All scores are percentages; higher is better.
                                   Analysis Analysis Report               Artifact
           Configuration
                                   Breadth      Depth       Quality Completeness
            General-purpose agent        27.35          25.21     35.64          36.94
              + Skill-Hub                66.32          48.46     47.03          85.90
              + DataBridge               36.59          29.39     37.84          32.43
            QwenPaw-Data (both)          79.63          62.60     58.09          86.04


Objective queries. We judge each objective query by exact agreement with a reference answer
that has been reviewed by more than two domain experts. On these queries, QwenPaw-Data returns
the correct result on about 96.5% of the cases. The main reason is that DataBridge grounds each
query in the right metrics, dimensions, and tables, so the agent binds to the correct entities instead of
guessing, while Skill-Hub contributes two assets: a robust data-retrieval pipeline that chains query
rewriting, context gathering, disambiguation, SQL generation, and error recovery; and standardized
metric-computation scripts. Together they let the agent follow a verified procedure rather than ad-hoc
logic.

Open-ended queries. For each open-ended query, we let business users give a satisfaction score on
a 100-point scale after they have used the result. Under this measure, the deployed QwenPaw-Data
attains an average satisfaction of 78.3. When we replace it with a leading general-purpose agent from
the strongest tier of current systems, one that lacks DataBridge and Skill-Hub, satisfaction drops
to 34.1. To keep the comparison fair, both systems are driven by the same underlying LLM with
fixed request parameters, so the reported gain is a conservative lower bound attributable purely to the
harness. The gap traces directly to QwenPaw-Data’s three components. DataBridge grounds each
query in the right metrics and dimensions, Skill-Hub supplies the expert analytical procedure, and the
Host runtime keeps the long-horizon, multi-step execution reliable and every artifact traceable, so
QwenPaw-Data tends to deliver a complete analytical loop: it presents the overall trend, abnormal
fluctuations, and drill-down attribution layer by layer, and keeps every visualization consistent with
the stated conclusion. The general-purpose agent, without grounded semantics or a codified procedure,
guesses at the semantics and skips the deeper analytical steps, so its answers drift and stay shallow.
As an additional benefit, QwenPaw-Data brings two further gains. First, it annotates data lineage
and query provenance throughout, so every result is fully auditable, which is essential in high-stakes
data analysis where every conclusion must be traced back to its source before it can drive a business
decision. Second, rather than leaving the LLM to explore the raw schema on its own, which is
extremely costly when an industrial warehouse holds vast numbers of tables and columns, DataBridge
supplies exactly the metrics, dimensions, and table context each step needs. In our measurements,
this reduces context token consumption by roughly 42% on average.

6.2   Component Ablation

Having seen the end-to-end gains, we now answer the second question by isolating how each added
component contributes. Holding the same underlying LLM fixed, we start from the general-purpose
agent and enable Skill-Hub and DataBridge, individually and then together as the full QwenPaw-
Data, on the same open-ended requests. To evaluate these configurations at scale under a single
consistent standard, we ask the BI users to express their expectations for each request as explicit
checkpoints along four dimensions, and an LLM-as-a-judge then scores every configuration against
these checkpoints. The dimensions capture what business users care about: analysis breadth, whether
the analysis covers the relevant metrics, dimensions, and segments rather than a single angle; analysis
depth, whether it moves beyond surface numbers to anomaly attribution, root-cause decomposition,
and actionable conclusions; report quality, whether the derived report is clear, well organized, and
has every conclusion supported by data and visualizations; and artifact completeness, whether the
expected artifacts, such as the analysis plan, query results, intermediate computation results, Python
code, and charts, are all persisted to disk and thus traceable. Table 3 reports the results.
The general-purpose agent alone stays low across all four dimensions, consistent with the low
satisfaction it received in the deployment comparison of Section 6.1. Adding Skill-Hub sharply lifts


                                                   20
Table 4: Results on public data-agent benchmarks. Higher is better; each column follows the
benchmark’s official metric. The Human and current SOTA figures are taken from the respective
benchmark papers [Lai et al., 2025, Lei et al., 2025].
                               Method          KramaBench DAComp
                               Human                76.75             –
                            Current SOTA            55.83           50.84
                            QwenPaw-Data            68.32           62.38



analysis breadth and artifact completeness: it supplies carefully curated analytical skills that walk the
agent through the complete analysis flow layer by layer, while its runtime skills enforce persistence
conventions that write every intermediate artifact to disk and keep it traceable. Yet analysis depth
and report quality stay limited, because without grounded metric and dimension semantics and the
relationships among them, the agent is unsure of the right direction and its analysis can drift, for
example failing to drill down into the secondary or even tertiary dimensions, which in turn leaves the
report thin. Adding DataBridge alone grounds the semantics but yields only modest gains, because
without a codified methodology the agent skips the complete analytical steps. Only with both does
QwenPaw-Data reach the top level across all four dimensions, and the combined gain clearly exceeds
the sum of the two components applied alone, showing that grounding evidence and methodology are
not merely complementary but mutually reinforcing, delivering their full value only when present
together.


6.3   Reproducibility on Open-Source Benchmarks

The evaluations in Sections 6.1 and 6.2 run on proprietary enterprise workloads that cannot be
publicly disclosed. To let others verify QwenPaw-Data’s underlying capability in a reproducible and
comparable setting, we also report results on two public data-agent benchmarks, KramaBench [Lai
et al., 2025] and DAComp [Lei et al., 2025], which echo different facets of enterprise analysis.
KramaBench builds end-to-end data analysis pipelines over heterogeneous, multi-source data lakes,
which requires sifting the useful evidence out of a large volume of raw data, and thus mirrors the data
part of our real tasks. DAComp instead mimics the data-intelligence lifecycle over larger databases
and calls for more open-ended reasoning, closer to the intent and scale of real analytical queries. Both
go beyond a single lookup and require multi-step pipelines from raw data to insight.
As shown in Table 4, QwenPaw-Data leads the current state of the art on both benchmarks, and on
KramaBench it closes much of the remaining gap to human experts. It reaches this with the same
design that drives its enterprise gains: through a standardized data-retrieval and discovery pipeline it
narrows a sprawling data lake to the most useful information, and it keeps the multi-step analysis
on a disciplined path from raw data to insight. That this lead holds on public data confirms that the
underlying capability generalizes beyond our private workloads.

Summary. Overall, these results answer the two questions posed at the outset. In real enterprise
analysis, QwenPaw-Data resolves objective queries with high accuracy and substantially outperforms
a strong general-purpose agent on open-ended tasks (Q1); this advantage stems from the interplay
between grounded enterprise semantics and codified analytical skills, neither of which suffices in
isolation (Q2); and its lead on public benchmarks shows that the capability is reproducible and
generalizes beyond our own deployment.


7     Future Work

The current version of QwenPaw-Data establishes the core architecture for agentic data analysis, with
DataBridge grounding execution in semantic evidence, Skill-Hub standardizing reusable analytical
methods, and Host turning both into controllable runtime workflows. Building on this foundation,
future work follows the same architectural line and moves from a reliable analysis framework toward
a continuously improving enterprise data intelligence system, along three directions.


                                                   21
Strengthening the semantic–method–runtime flywheel. The first direction is to keep advancing
each of the three components. DataBridge will pursue richer semantic mining, automatic graph
refinement, and semantic evolution from execution traces and user feedback. Skill-Hub will focus
on cross-domain skill transferability, so cold-starting a new domain no longer means building
analytical methods from scratch. Host will improve execution efficiency, deployment flexibility,
and interoperability with emerging agent runtimes. Together, these advances tighten the semantic–
method–runtime flywheel, making the framework more reusable across domains and more adaptive
to real enterprise usage.

Improving interactive and self-verifying execution. The second direction is to make long-running
analysis inspectable and correctable while it runs, not only after it finishes. QwenPaw-Data will
support stronger human-in-the-loop intervention, letting users inspect intermediate artifacts, revise
execution plans, correct analytical procedures, and steer subsequent actions without restarting the
workflow. It will also strengthen self-judging mechanisms that estimate result confidence by combin-
ing semantic consistency, execution evidence, reflection outcomes, and historical feedback, turning
verification from a final manual review into a runtime capability.

Scaling toward enterprise data intelligence. The third direction is to extend QwenPaw-Data from
an analytical framework toward a data brain for enterprise decision-making and data management,
making insight discovery, action recommendation, workflow coordination, and data-asset optimization
more systematic and governed at enterprise scale. Supporting this shift will require stronger tenant
isolation, fine-grained permission control, secure execution environments, and enterprise-grade
governance for large-scale multi-tenant deployments.

8   Conclusion
In this report, we presented QwenPaw-Data, an end-to-end framework for agentic data analysis
organized around three AI-native architectural questions: what facts to use, how to analyze, and how
to run the resulting workflow. DataBridge answers the first with governed semantic evidence that stays
grounded and fresh, Skill-Hub answers the second with reusable and consistent analytical methods,
and Host answers the third with a runtime that makes execution controllable, verifiable, and robust.
Together, these components address the core difficulty of enterprise data analysis, where a system
must ground business concepts, follow consistent analytical procedures, and execute long-running
workflows in a controllable environment. This modular design offers a practical foundation for
continuously improving data-analysis agents and scaling them toward governed, enterprise-level data
intelligence.

References
Agent Skills. Agent Skills: An Open Standard for Agent Skills. https://agentskills.io/home,
  2026. Open standard specification, accessed July 2026.

Alibaba Cloud. Quick BI Intelligent Q: A New Data Consumption Paradigm. https://help.a
  liyun.com/en/quick-bi/product-overview/intelligentq, 2026. Alibaba Intelligent Q
  documentation, accessed July 2026.

Alibaba Group. Qwenpaw. https://github.com/agentscope-ai/QwenPaw, 2026. GitHub
  repository, accessed July 2026.

Amazon. Generative BI with QuickSight. https://docs.aws.amazon.com/quick/latest/use
 rguide/quicksight-gen-bi.html, 2026. Amazon QuickSight documentation, accessed July
 2026.

Anthropic. Model Context Protocol. https://modelcontextprotocol.io, 2024. Open protocol
  specification, accessed July 2026.

Anthropic. Claude code. https://claude.com/product/claude-code, 2026. Claude Code
  documentation, accessed July 2026.


                                                 22
Anthropic. How anthropic enables self-service data analytics with claude. https://claude.com
 /blog/how-anthropic-enables-self-service-data-analytics-with-claude, 2026.
 Anthropic blog, accessed July 2026.

Databricks. Genie Agents Concepts. https://docs.databricks.com/aws/en/genie/conce
  pts, 2026a. Databricks Genie Agents documentation, accessed July 2026.

Databricks. Genie Ontology. https://docs.databricks.com/aws/en/genie-one/chat#ge
  nie-ontology, 2026b. Databricks Genie Ontology documentation, accessed July 2026.

Google. Conversational Analytics Overview. https://docs.cloud.google.com/bigquery/d
  ocs/conversational-analytics, 2026. BigQuery Conversational Analytics documentation,
  accessed July 2026.

IBM. IBM Cognos Analytics AI Assistant. https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/cognos-analy
  tics/12.0.x?topic=panel-getting-started-assistant, 2026. IBM Cognos Analytics
  documentation, accessed July 2026.

Eugenie Lai, Gerardo Vitagliano, Ziyu Zhang, Sivaprasad Sudhir, Om Chabra, Anna Zeng, Anton A.
  Zabreyko, Chenning Li, Ferdi Kossmann, Jialin Ding, Jun Chen, Markos Markakis, Matthew
  Russo, Weiyang Wang, Ziniu Wu, Michael J. Cafarella, Lei Cao, Samuel Madden, and Tim Kraska.
  Kramabench: A benchmark for AI systems on data-to-insight pipelines over data lakes. CoRR,
  abs/2506.06541, 2025.

LangChain. State of agent engineering. https://www.langchain.com/state-of-agent-eng
  ineering, 2026. LangChain blog, accessed July 2026.

Fangyu Lei, Jinxiang Meng, Yiming Huang, Junjie Zhao, Yitong Zhang, Jianwen Luo, Xin Zou,
  Ruiyi Yang, Wenbo Shi, Yan Gao, Shizhu He, Zuo Wang, Qian Liu, Yang Wang, Ke Wang, Jun
  Zhao, and Kang Liu. Dacomp: Benchmarking data agents across the full data intelligence lifecycle.
  CoRR, abs/2512.04324, 2025.

Ruiying Ma, Shreya Shankar, Ruiqi Chen, Yiming Lin, Sepanta Zeighami, Rajoshi Ghosh, Abhinav
  Gupta, Anushrut Gupta, Tanmai Gopal, and Aditya G. Parameswaran. Can AI agents answer your
  data questions? A benchmark for data agents. CoRR, abs/2603.20576, 2026.

Microsoft. Fabric Data Agent Creation. https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/fabric/d
 ata-science/concept-data-agent, 2026a. Microsoft Fabric Data Agent documentation,
 accessed July 2026.

Microsoft. What Is Ontology (Preview)? https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/fabric/iq/
 ontology/overview, 2026b. Microsoft Fabric IQ Ontology documentation, accessed July 2026.

OpenAI. Codex. https://openai.com/codex/, 2026. Codex documentation, accessed July 2026.

OpenClaw Contributors. Openclaw. https://github.com/openclaw/openclaw, 2026. GitHub
  repository, accessed July 2026.

Oracle. About Oracle Analytics AI Agents. https://docs.oracle.com/en/cloud/paas/an
  alytics-cloud/acubi/oracle-analytics-ai-agents.html, 2026. Oracle Analytics AI
  Agents documentation, accessed July 2026.

Mohammadreza Pourreza and Davood Rafiei. DIN-SQL: decomposed in-context learning of text-to-
 sql with self-correction. In NeurIPS, 2023.

Mohammadreza Pourreza, Hailong Li, Ruoxi Sun, Yeounoh Chung, Shayan Talaei, Gaurav Tarlok
 Kakkar, Yu Gan, Amin Saberi, Fatma Ozcan, and Sercan Ö. Arik. CHASE-SQL: multi-path
 reasoning and preference optimized candidate selection in text-to-sql. In ICLR. OpenReview.net,
 2025.

Snowflake. Cortex Analyst. https://docs.snowflake.com/en/user-guide/snowflake-cor
  tex/cortex-analyst, 2026. Snowflake Cortex Analyst documentation, accessed July 2026.


                                                23
Zhaoyan Sun, Shan Zhong, Daizhou Wen, Jiaxing Han, Guoliang Li, Ying Yan, Peng Zhang, Yu Su,
  Xiang Qi, Baolin Sun, Chengyuan Yang, Tao Fang, and Huaiyu Ruan. Agenticdatabench: A
  comprehensive benchmark for data agents. CoRR, abs/2607.01647, 2026.
Volcengine. Intelligent Analytics Agent Overview. https://www.volcengine.com/docs/8676
  0/1874950, 2026. Volcengine Intelligent Analytics Agent documentation, accessed July 2026.
John Yang, Carlos E. Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan,
  and Ofir Press. Swe-agent: Agent-computer interfaces enable automated software engineering. In
  NeurIPS, 2024.




                                              24
