                 REFLECTIONS OF THE TOPIC AUTHORITIES
            ABOUT THE 2009 TREC LEGAL TRACK INTERACTIVE TASK

The seven Topic Authorities (“TAs”) that participated in the 2009 Interactive Task offer the
following thoughts and observations based on their experiences with the TREC Legal Track:

1.     The Importance of Interaction Between Teams and TAs. The TA role is intended to
       simulate the functions typically performed by a senior attorney overseeing a large
       document production. As were the TAs in the 2008 exercise, many of the 2009 TAs were
       surprised by the limited amount of contact and overall interaction that most teams had
       with their TAs. Very few of the teams used a significant portion of the ten hours they
       were each allotted to consult with their TAs. This led some TAs to suggest that the
       TREC Legal Track consider imposing a “minimum contacts” requirement. Moreover,
       the TAs’ surprise extended not only to the quantity of the communications, but also to
       their quality. Some teams did not appear to grasp how to formulate questions that would
       have helped them to clarify the topic’s scope or to arrive at a common conception of
       relevance. It was the general consensus of the TAs that the teams that understood how to
       generate such questions performed considerably better than those that did not, even if the
       team spent less time interacting with their TA, suggesting that ultimately, the quality of
       the team/TA interaction was more important than the quantity.

2.     The Importance of Early Study of the Document Collection. Consistent with the
       observation of the 2008 TAs, the 2009 TAs suggested the need for teams to become
       familiar with the document collection early in the process in order to gain sufficient
       familiarity with the corpus to be able to formulate meaningful questions for discussion
       with the TAs. Teams that made such an early investment were better able to present their
       TAs with increasingly nuanced questions that allowed them to reach quicker and more
       precise agreement on the contours of relevance. Some of the 2009 TAs suggested that
       the TAs also be given direct access to the document set – or at least a random sample
       drawn from it – following their review of the complaint and requests for production, but
       before beginning their work with their teams. The TAs stressed the importance for both
       the TAs and the teams to develop an adequate baseline of knowledge about the topic,
       through research of publicly available sources, as well as through familiarity with at least
       some of the recurring themes in the document collection, in advance of their initial
       discussions. This observation would seem to comport with growing anecdotal support in
       the industry for what is commonly referred to as “early case assessment.” The TAs
       noted that, in addition to a general lack of familiarity with the document collection, few
       of the teams appeared to have engaged in any research beyond reading the complaint and
       requests for production they had been provided. Furthermore, many of the teams
       displayed little or no interest in participating in a “kick-off” call about the topic designed
       to replicate the training session typically provided to reviewers at the beginning of a
       large-scale document review. Some TAs suggested that the TREC Legal Track should
       consider requiring that all teams participate in such a “kick-off” call to establish a
       baseline definition of relevance. Given the geographical dispersion of teams and
       scheduling challenges, it was suggested that the “kick-off” calls might be taped so that
     team members that were unable to participate live could listen to them at their
     convenience.

3.   The Importance of a Systematic Plan and an Iterative Approach. Many TAs
     commented on the failure of some teams to develop a systematic and deliberate plan for
     defining relevance, as opposed to applying an ad hoc approach. The TAs stressed the
     importance of an iterative process that allowed for course correction as the TAs’ view of
     relevance was refined through the course of the document review. The TAs identified
     two approaches, used by some of the teams, as particularly helpful.

     The first involved the team generating and posing a sequence of questions that forced the
     TA to articulate increasingly precise determinations of relevance over time. Such
     questions helped the TA and the team to identify the outer boundary of relevance, as well
     as to focus on the “core” documents, as opposed to those that were only peripherally or
     technically relevant. The TAs felt such interactions provided them with the opportunity
     to reflect on and therefore to provide the teams with more well-articulated and nuanced
     differentiations, rather than supplying only rough, bright line rules. The TAs observed
     that some of the teams failed to ask questions about “grey areas.” Instead, they tended to
     interact in ways that produced only an undifferentiated, “black and white” understanding
     of relevance – often late in the process – when they would have benefited more from
     allowing time to raise follow-up questions designed to refine their understanding,
     especially in addressing “gray areas.” (The limitations of this approach were particularly
     apparent in requests for appeals and adjudication of human assessor determinations of
     relevance where “black and white” determinations made by certain teams failed to reflect
     further refinements the TAs had provided to other teams.) The TAs noted that some
     teams did use an iterative approach, but few did enough of it. The TAs tended to prefer
     “live” (telephone) contact with the teams over email for this kind of interaction because it
     provided the teams with greater exposure to the TAs thought process and more
     opportunity for collaboration and immediate feedback.

     The second approach the TAs found useful was when teams tied questions to specific
     document exemplars, rather than asking for relevance determinations about whole
     categories of documents in the abstract. The TAs found it easier and more useful to
     respond to concrete examples, especially if the sample was provided in such a way as to
     allow the TA time to reflect in advance of having to respond, thereby permitting a more
     considered determination and an opportunity to formulate useful guidance for the team.

4.   Search is Challenging and Keywords Alone are Often Insufficient. The TAs were
     surprised that the topics proved quite challenging for both teams and assessors, even such
     seemingly straightforward topics as “football” and “shredding.” For some of the topics,
     this may have been due, in part, to the fact that they yielded relatively few relevant
     documents compared to the total number of documents in the collection. Moreover,
     teams working on the same topic did not seem to identify the same core of relevant
     documents; a fair number of documents were identified as relevant by one team, but not
     by another. The TAs would have liked a better understanding of the process employed
     by each team to identify relevant documents and expressed concern about their ability to



                                             -2-
       provide an accurate description of the process if they had been forced to defend it to an
       adversary or court. The TAs agreed that the use of keyword search terms, alone, was not
       well suited for identifying “all” documents referring or relating to complex topics such as
       those presented by the requests for production. Unsurprisingly, the TAs observed that
       search terms tended to result in a less focused effort that yielded many unresponsive
       documents. Some of the TAs believed that while the use of search terms may be a
       necessary or appropriate approach to narrow the document population for further review,
       keyword or Boolean search is not the optimal approach to define a set of documents for
       production. The TAs wondered whether and how the teams were employing “concept
       search” methods and other advanced technologies that are readily available in the market.

5.     Concerns About the Quality of Human Review. Based on the volume and results of
       the appeals and adjudication process, some of the TAs were less confident than they were
       before about the quality of human review. The responsiveness determinations rendered
       by the human assessors included many flagrant errors, suggesting that human review may
       be more flawed than the legal profession currently understands and acknowledges.
       Although human review for relevance remains the “gold standard” by which all other
       methods are judged, the number and nature of errors by human assessors raised questions
       about whether human reviewers are capable of consistently and accurately identifying
       relevant documents. The TAs flagged the importance of high quality, ongoing training
       and supervision of reviewers, and the implementation of quality control measures. The
       TAs suggested that the accuracy of human review was something that the TREC legal
       Track should consider examining in the future.

6.     The Goal of the Exercise. As many of the observations above reflect, the TAs’
       experiences raise the question of whether the teams and the TAs shared the same
       understanding of the goal of the exercise. The TAs were expecting the exercise to
       replicate the experience of responding to a discovery request in the context of civil
       litigation. They expected the teams to simulate an actual service provider focused on
       finding all of the documents the TA would need to identify to respond to the request for
       production. Some teams, however, were focused on understanding how a single
       technique could contribute to meeting e-discovery needs; they understood that the
       technique would not be sufficient to fulfill a production obligation.

The TAs uniformly reported that their participation in the 2009 TREC Legal Track was a
valuable professional experience that provided them with insight into the search and document
review processes. They strongly encourage others – both practitioners and service providers, as
well as academics – to support and contribute to the TREC legal Track by participating in future
exercises, whether as draftspersons, participating teams, TAs, volunteer assessors, or by
analyzing its published results and suggesting other useful lines of inquiry.

                      Prepared by Maura R. Grossman on behalf of herself and:

                      Art Bieser
                      Christopher H. Boehning
                      Michael Roman Geske



                                               -3-
Howard J. C. Nicols
David Stanton
K. Krasnow Waterman




                      -4-
