Completed Worksheet: BoolQ
Evidence-Centered Benchmark Design
Evidence-Centered Benchmark Design (ECBD) is a framework that formalizes the benchmark
design process. It requires first specifying the intended use of the benchmark (including
specifying the objects of evaluation). The process is then broken down into five modules:
   - Capability module: capabilities that the benchmark aims to measure.
   - Content module: pool of test items that draw out responses from the objects.
   - Adaptation module: adapting or instructing the objects to complete the tasks.
   - Assembly module: selecting from the pool of test items to build the set used for
        evaluation.
   - Evidence module: extracting and accumulating evidence about the capabilities of
        interest from responses produced by the objects.

This worksheet provides guidance on how to create a new benchmark or analyze an existing
benchmark following ECBD. It can be completed from different perspectives: as the creator of a
new benchmark, as the custodian or the user of an existing benchmark, or as a third-party
analyzing benchmarks, etc. Each module contains three questions:
    - Describe: what design decisions did the benchmark creators make for this module?
    - Justify: why did the benchmark creators make these decisions? This involves forming a
        hypothesis that the decisions allow the module to accomplish its role in the process of
        gathering necessary capability evidence.
    - Evidence: what validity evidence do the benchmark creators have to support the above
        hypothesis? In other words, what shows that the module indeed accomplishes its role?
This worksheet is not a checklist, and it is not required to answer each question perfectly. These
questions are meant to encourage reflection and validation of benchmark design decisions, as
well as to guide benchmark documentation.
Table of Contents
Intended Use
The Capability Module
The Content Module
The Presentation Module
The Assembly Module
The Evidence Module
Glossary

Benchmark Name and Reference(s)
 Christopher Clark, Kenton Lee, Ming-Wei Chang, Tom Kwiatkowski, Michael Collins, and
 Kristina Toutanova. 2019. Boolq: Exploring the surprising difficulty of natural yes/no questions.
 In North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (NAACL).

 URL: https://aclanthology.org/N19-1300/


Who is filing the worksheet:
From what perspective is this worksheet completed? In other words, what is the relation
between the person(s) completing this worksheet and the benchmark that is the focus of this
worksheet?
 Third-party: Yu Lu Liu, Jackie Chi Kit Cheung, Alexandra Olteanu
Intended Use
The validity of a benchmark concerns whether it can be used as intended. It is therefore crucial
to first clearly establish the intended use of a benchmark before analyzing it or creating it.

Q1 - Who/What are the intended objects of evaluation? Elaboration on the objects of
evaluation (e.g., their assumed capabilities, demographic information for human objects of
evaluation, etc.) helps us better understand whether the benchmark is suitable for all intended
objects of evaluation.
 The targetted evaluatees are “models” (p.2924), which includes (according to the models
 evaluated in their experiments) shallow models as well as neural models such as BERT,
 Elmo, GPT.

 The authors also claim to have evaluated the ability of humans to answer the boolean
 questions in the benchmark.


Q2 - What is the intended use of the benchmark? Who are the intended users of the
benchmark? Benchmark results aim to provide insights about the objects of evaluation: how
are users meant to use these insights?
 The authors do not explicitly mention any intended users of the benchmark, perhaps implied
 to be the NLP research community. The benchmark results would provide insights about the
 capability of interest (see Capability Module) of the evaluatees, but it is unstated what
 intended users would to do with these insights.

 Based on the uses in the experiments in the paper, these results could be used to:
    - Compare models against humans in terms of the capability of interest.
    - Compare transfer learning methods to find the most effective approach to obtain more
       capable models (in terms of the capability of interest).
The Capability Module
The capability module specifies the capabilities that the benchmark aims to evaluate. The term
“capability” refers to a construct (e.g., quality criteria, skill, etc.) that the objects of evaluation are
thought to exhibit or possess. Capabilities often cannot be directly observed or directly
measured, thus requiring the benchmark to indirectly measure them by gathering necessary
evidence about said capabilities.

Q3 - DESCRIBE: i) What are the capabilities of interest? ii) How is each one defined, and
under what context is each one defined?
 There seems to be different level of granularity for the target capability. At the highest level,
 the capability of interest is to “understanding what facts can be inferred to be true or false
 from text [which is] an essential part of natural language understanding.” At a more granular
 level, it’s the “ability to answer naturally occurring yes/no questions” (p.2924)

 The connection between these two capabilities seem to be that naturally occurring yes/no
 questions would often query “non-factoid information, and that human annotators need to
 apply a wide range of inferential abilities when answering them.” (p. 2925) → the ability to
 answer naturally occurring yes/no questions would thus capture the highest-level capability of
 reasoning/understanding.


Additional recommended questions to consider so to further clarify and contextualize the
definitions (in benchmark analysis: as presented by the benchmark)
    - How does the definition used by the benchmark differ from other existing definitions of
         this capability?
         Nothing mentioned.


    -   How does this capability differ from other similarly defined capabilities?
         The same higher-level capability of reasoning/understanding is captured differently
         through:
             - Ability to distinguish entailment: label statements as “entailment” or
                “contradiction” based on a given text. The authors argue that “Using naturally
                occurring yes/no questions ensures even greater independence between the
                questions and premise text, and ties our dataset to a clear end-task”.

             -   Ability to answer questions: multi-step reasoning (HotPotQA), conversational
                 QA (e.g., CoQA). The main difference is the naturalness. The authors criticizes
                 prior datasets “heavily [prompting] users”, “class imbalance (80% ‘yes’
                 answers)”, and “engineering data to be more difficult”. “This risks resulting in
                 models that do not have obvious end-use applications since they are optimized
                 to perform in an artificial setting” (p.2925)



Q4 - JUSTIFY: How are the capabilities of interest connected to the intended use of the
benchmark (specified in Q2)? Are the capabilities theoretically attainable by the objects
to be evaluated? Explain the interest in measuring the capabilities in Q3 and question whether
it may be impossible for the objects of evaluation to have said capabilities.
 This question is difficult to answer given that the intended use (Q2) is poorly specified. There
 is no discussion of theoretical attainability in the paper.



Q5 - SUPPORT: What validity evidence do the benchmark creators offer to support the
choice and definition of capabilities of interest?
 The data analysis (see Content Module) consistutes evidence that naturally-occurring yes/no
 questions collected in this benchmark i) query non-factoid information and ii) require human
 annotators to apply a wide range of inferential abilities to answer them.

 However, we consider this data analysis to be evidence that the gathered dataset actually
 satisfies conditions i) and ii) -- not evidence showing that satisfying conditions i) and ii) in
 general capture the highest-level capability of reasoning/understanding, which what we need
 here in this module. (?)
The Content Module
The content module specifies test items that the benchmark could require objects of evaluation
to perform or to respond to. The items should elicit evidence about some capability of interest,
so that said capability evidence can be later extracted from the responses and aggregated to
produce a measurement of said capability.

Q6 - DESCRIBE:
   - Characterize the test items. Most often, NLP evaluation relies on input data, so this
      step could involve describing the data that is available to the benchmark to use, how the
      data is obtained, etc.
        Each content instance consists of a boolean question, a paragraph from a Wikipedia
        article, and the title of the article. The questions are selected from queries to the
        Google search engine. The work followed the data collection method used by Natural
        Questions (NQ) (Kwiatkowski et al., 2019):

               Annotators label question/article pairs in a three-step process. First, they
               decide if the question is good, meaning it is comprehensible, unambiguous, and
               requesting factual information. This judgment is made before the annotator
               sees the Wikipedia page. Next, for good questions, annotators find a passage
               within the document that contains enough information to answer the question.
               Annotators can mark questions as “not answerable” if the Wikipedia article
               does not contain the requested information.” (p. 2926)

        The authors presented further information on the topic of the questions, what kind of
        information the questions request, and the kinds of reasoning skills required for
        humans to answer the questions (p. 2927-2928)
        Note that this described dataset is NOT the one used to evaluate human annotators. In
        fact, a small subset of it is taken as responses (see Evidence Module) from human
        annotators.


   -   Which capabilities of interest does each item aim to capture? Each item can aim to
       capture one or several capabilities amongst those listed in Q3.
        As there is only one capability of interest (at the most granular level, and at the highest
        level), all content instances must aim to measure it.


Q7 - JUSTIFY: How does each test item elicit evidence about its target capabilities?
Justify via the item descriptions above.
 The test times are shown to satisfy the following criteria:
 i) Querying non-factoid information (Table 1 in Q6)
 ii) Humans need to apply a wide range of inferential abilities (Table 2 in Q6) when answering
 the questions.
 The benchmark creators seem to be making the justification that those questions will, as a
 result, require models to demonstrate inferential abilities.

 The benchmark creators further hypothesize on why natural yes/no questions (collected by
 the benchmark) require inference (p.2928):
     - Factoid questions are rare, perhaps because people tend to phrase such questions as
        short-answer questions.
     - “both the passages and questions rarely include negation. As a result, detecting a “no”
        answer typically requires understanding that a positive assertion in the text excludes,
        or makes unlikely, a positive assertion in the question. This requires reasoning that
        goes beyond paraphrasing”
Q8 - SUPPORT: What evidence do the benchmark creators offer to support content
validity of the exanokes? In other words, we question whether the data captures capabilities
of interest. Content validity is often based on analysis by external experts or benchmark users.
 Nothing mentioned.
The Adaptation Module
When evaluating humans, the benchmark might instruct them to perform a task by providing
instructions, training exercises, demonstrations, etc. When evaluating models/systems, there
are also myriad methods that i) modify the models/systems (e.g., fine-tuning), or ii) format or
add onto the input (e.g., adding examples in few-shot prompting). These adaptation methods
should be chosen carefully so as to not confound evaluation results.

Q9 - DESCRIBE: Given an input, how are the objects of evaluation adapted or instructed
to provide the output?
 For models, the benchmark did not prescribe an adaptation method.

 Note that the authors experimented with several model training strategies: directly training on
 BoolQ training set, finetuning, unsupervised pre-training with language modeling objective,
 transfer learning using various datasets, etc. These could be interpreted as adaptation
 methods. However, since one of the experiments in the BoolQ paper is about which strategies
 result in models with better IR, we consider a “model” (i.e., object of evaluation) to include its
 training strategy.

 E.g.:
 Option A: BERT finetuned on BoolQ training data = a “model” → the option we go with.
 Option B: BERT = a “model”; Finetuning on BoolQ training data = presentation method.

 For human annotators, there is no information on exactly what the human annotators see as
 stimulus (e.g., how the question and passage are presented)


Q10 - JUSTIFY: Elaborate on the suitability of the adaptation methods for all intended
objects of evaluation.
 Not applicable


Q11 - SUPPORT: What validity evidence do benchmark designers offer that supports the
choice of the adaptation methods?
 Not applicable
The Assembly Module
Items specified by the content module are what the benchmark could use. The assembly
module concerns what test items from that pool will actually be used by the benchmark for
evaluation, and whether this set allows the benchmark to gather sufficient evidence.

Q12 - DESCRIBE: How many items are chosen to assemble the subset used for
evaluation? What factors inform this selection?
 The entirety of BoolQ test set (3.2K) is used for evaluation of models. It is not clear how data
 points are selected from the total set (16K) to form this test set, apart from ensuring that
 questions from Natural Questions (prior work) are not in the test set.

 For the estimation of human performance, 110 questions are randomly chosen from the total
 BoolQ set (minus Natural Questions).


Q13 - JUSTIFY: How does the described assembly method ensure that the produced
subset elicits sufficient evidence for all capabilities of interest?
 Nothing mentioned.


Q14 - SUPPORT: What validity evidence do the benchmark creators offer to support the
choice of assembly methods?
 Nothing mentioned.
The Evidence Module

Evidence Extraction
In response to each presented test item, objects of evaluation produce observable behaviors
(referred to as “responses”) which are captured by the benchmark. From these responses, the
benchmark extracts evidence about capabilities of interest that said test item targets (referred to
as “salient evidence”).

Q15 - DESCRIBE: For each test item…
   - What responses are captured and used for evidence extraction? When evaluating
       humans, many types of responses can be captured: selection in multiple-choice
       questions, long-form answers, response time, etc. Similarly, the benchmark can use the
       generated text (decoded in a certain way), token probabilities, running time, etc.
        Produced class label: “Yes” or “No”

        For models, the class label is obtained by the final softmax layer prediction.
        For humans, it is the annotated label that is taken as results.


   -   How is evidence extracted and represented?
        Whether the predicted/annotated label is correct (i.e. matches with the reference
        label):
        For models, using answers by annotators as reference.
        For humans, using answers by authors as reference.


Q16 - JUSTIFY: How does the extracted evidence capture the capabilities of interest?
 Both annotators’ answers and authors’ answers are presented as good-quality labels that can
 be considered as ground-truths. No justification explicitly given for the metric (i.e. exact
 match) → Implicit? A correct label is evidence that the evaluatee is able to answer naturally
 yes/no questions.


Q17 - SUPPORT: What validity evidence do the benchmark creators offer to support the
choice of evidence extraction method?
 Annotation quality for human annotators estimated at 90%, which supports the use of
 annotated answers as reference. No other evidence mentioned.


Evidence Accumulation
Q18 - DESCRIBE: How is the evidence accumulated to draw insights about the objects of
evaluation in terms of capabilities of interest?
 Accuracy
Q19 - JUSTIFY: How does the method of accumulating evidence capture capabilities of
interest?
Nothing mentioned.


Q20 - SUPPORT: What validity evidence do the benchmark creators offer to support the
choice of evidence accumulation method?
Nothing mentioned.
