Completed Worksheet: HELM
Evidence-Centered Benchmark Design
Evidence-Centered Benchmark Design (ECBD) is a framework that formalizes the benchmark
design process. It requires first specifying the intended use of the benchmark (including
specifying the objects of evaluation). The process is then broken down into five modules:
   - Capability module: capabilities that the benchmark aims to measure.
   - Content module: pool of test items that draw out responses from the objects.
   - Adaptation module: adapting or instructing the objects to complete the tasks.
   - Assembly module: selecting from the pool of test items to build the set used for
        evaluation.
   - Evidence module: extracting and accumulating evidence about the capabilities of
        interest from responses produced by the objects.

This worksheet provides guidance on how to create a new benchmark or analyze an existing
benchmark following ECBD. It can be completed from different perspectives: as the creator of a
new benchmark, as the custodian or the user of an existing benchmark, or as a third-party
analyzing benchmarks, etc. Each module contains three questions:
    - Describe: what design decisions did the benchmark creators make for this module?
    - Justify: why did the benchmark creators make these decisions? This involves forming a
        hypothesis that the decisions allow the module to accomplish its role in the process of
        gathering necessary capability evidence.
    - Evidence: what validity evidence do the benchmark creators have to support the above
        hypothesis? In other words, what shows that the module indeed accomplishes its role?
This worksheet is not a checklist, and it is not required to answer each question perfectly. These
questions are meant to encourage reflection and validation of benchmark design decisions, as
well as to guide benchmark documentation.
Table of Contents
Intended Use
The Capability Module
The Content Module
The Adaptation Module
The Assembly Module
The Evidence Module

Benchmark Name and Reference(s)
The references are the source of information used to complete this worksheet. For example, a
third-party analyzing an existing benchmark may choose to use the academic publication
introducing said benchmark as the source of information. Other sources of information could be
blogposts, official websites, or code repositories accompanying the benchmark.
 Holistic Evaluation of Language Models (HELM)

 Percy Liang, Rishi Bommasani, Tony Lee, Dimitris Tsipras, Dilara Soylu, Michihiro Yasunaga,
 Yian Zhang, Deepak Narayanan, Yuhuai Wu, Ananya Kumar, et al. 2022. Holistic evaluation
 of language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.09110


Who is filing the worksheet:
From what perspective is this worksheet completed? In other words, what is the relation
between the person(s) completing this worksheet and the benchmark that is the focus of this
worksheet?
 Third-party: Yu Lu Liu, Su Lin Blodgett, Ziang Xiao
Intended Use
The validity of a benchmark concerns whether it can be used as intended. It is therefore crucial
to first clearly establish the intended use of a benchmark before analyzing it or creating it.

Q1 - Who/What are the intended objects of evaluation? Elaboration on the objects of
evaluation (e.g., their assumed capabilities, demographic information for human objects of
evaluation, etc.) helps us better understand whether the benchmark is suitable for all intended
objects of evaluation.


 The objects of evaluation are language models (LM), which are described to be “a black box
 that takes as input a prompt (string), along with decoding parameters (e.g. temperature). The
 model outputs a completion (string), along with log probabilities of the prompt and completion.
 We do not assume access to the internal model activations or its training data, which reflects
 the practical reality of API access available to researchers” (p. 15)


Q2 - What is the intended use of the benchmark? Who are the intended users of the
benchmark? Benchmark results aim to provide insights about the objects of evaluation: how
are users meant to use these insights?


 The intended users seem to be NLP practitioners, based on HELM’s description of the
 interpretation of the benchmark results: “we anticipate practitioners should first identify
 scenarios and metrics pertinent to their use conditions, and then prioritize these
 scenarios/metrics in interpreting the results of this benchmark” (p. 88)

 We were not able to identify exactly how practitioners are meant to interpret and use the
 benchmark results.
The Capability Module
The capability module specifies the capabilities that the benchmark aims to evaluate. The term
“capability” refers to a construct (e.g., quality criteria, skill, etc.) that the objects of evaluation are
thought to exhibit or possess. Capabilities often cannot be directly observed or directly
measured, thus requiring the benchmark to indirectly measure them by gathering necessary
evidence about said capabilities.

Q3 - DESCRIBE: i) What are the capabilities of interest? ii) How is each one defined, and
under what context is each one defined?
 HELM uses “desiderata” to designate the capabilities of interest. Although not explicitly stated
 as such, the highest-level capability of interest seems to be “practical utility”: the evaluation
 “provides clarity on the practical utility of existing models” (p. 37). The seven measured
 capabilities seem to all contribute to this capability, which is left undefined.

 The seven capabilities are:

     -   Accuracy is “an umbrella term for the standard accuracy-like metric for each scenario.
         This refers to the exact-match accuracy in text classification, the F1 score for word
         overlap in question answering, the MRR and NDCG scores for information retrieval,
         and the ROUGE score for summarization, [...]” (p. 29) This capability seems to have
         been conflated with automatic metrics (an alias for whatever automatic metric most
         commonly used to measure performance for each task listed, and not a capability).

     -   Uncertainty/Calibration: “a model is calibrated if it assigns meaningful probabilities to
         its predictions” (p. 30)

     -   Robustness (all quotes from p. 31): a robust model “needs to perform well across
         instance transformations.” Two types of transformations are considered:

             -   Invariance: model predictions need to be “stable [under] small,
                 semantics-preserving perturbations” to the input content instance.

             -   Equivariance: model needs to be “sensitive to perturbations that change the
                 target output and does not latch on irrelevant parts of the instance”.

     -   Fairness: “disparities in the task-specific accuracy of models across social groups”
         (p.34)

     -   (Social) Bias: “a systematic asymmetry in language choice” (p. 33): demographic
         representation (for erasure and over-representation) and stereotypical associations.

     -   Toxicity: “an umbrella for related concepts like hate speech, violent speech, and
         abusive language” (p.34)

     -   Inference Efficiency: inference costs in terms of energy, time, etc.


 Note that the above capabilities are selected using the following criteria (p. 28):
    - “no assumptions on the construction or structure of the model”
     - “no access beyond blackbox access”
     - “no assumptions on the broader system/context.”
 The definition of these capabilities thus respect these criteria. Notably, defining the above
 capabilities is done independently of broader context (at least, that is the goal to not hold
 any assumption on broader context). For Toxicity, HELM acknowledges that “the notion of
 toxicity is better addressed with greater context and with clarity on who is determining toxicity,
 which we lack in our broad-coverage evaluation”. The same could hold for other capabilities
 such as Fairness.

 Some passages hint at the connection between the capabilities of interest and “practical
 utility” (the connection is not clear because “practical utility” is not defined in the first place):
      - Accuracy: “Simply put, AI systems are not useful if they are not sufficiently accurate.”
           (p. 29)
      - Uncertainty/Calibration: “Calibration and appropriate expression of model
           uncertainty is especially critical for systems to be viable for deployment in high-stakes
           settings, including those where models inform decision-making (e.g. resume
           screening), which we increasingly see for language technology as its scope broadens.
           For example, if a model is uncertain in its prediction, a system designer could
           intervene by having a human perform the task instead to avoid a potential error (i.e.
           selective classification).” (p. 29)
      - Robustness: “When deployed in practice, models are confronted with the
           complexities of the open world (e.g. typos) that cause most current systems to
           significantly degrade. Thus, in order to better capture the performance of these models
           in practice, we need to expand our evaluation beyond the exact instances contained in
           our scenarios.” (p. 31)
      - Fairness: “The disparate treatment and disparate impact of machine learning is
           well-documented, including in the context of language technologies. Centering
           fairness and equity as first-class aspects of evaluation is therefore essential to
           ensuring technology plays a positive role in social change” (p. 32)
      - (Social) Bias: “Alongside fairness, social bias is central to the study of risks of
           language technologies” (p. 33)
      - Toxicity: “Models have been shown to generate toxic text when prompted, even when
           this text itself is not toxic, and including hateful text directed towards specific groups”
           (p.34)
      - Inference Efficiency: “Efficiency is another important dimension to evaluate language
           models on, since expensive training and inference costs make models less usable and
           less accessible to wide swaths of users”



Additional recommended questions to consider so to further clarify and contextualize the
definitions (in benchmark analysis: as presented by the benchmark)
    - How does the definition used by the benchmark differ from other existing definitions of
         this capability?
         Example in HELM: Robustness (p.31)

         “However, we emphasize that the other forms of robustness are important, but we find
         that they are comparatively more difficult to measure because of the lack of
         assumptions we make on the models we evaluate as well as the scale of our
        evaluation.” They list:
           - Robustness to distribution or subpopulation shift (Oren et al., 2019; Santurkar
               et al., 2020; Goel et al., 2020; Koh et al., 2021)
           - Adversarial robustness (Biggio et al., 2013; Szegedy et al., 2014)
           - Interactive human-in-the-loop adversarial evaluation (Wallace et al., 2019b; Nie
               et al., 2020; Bartolo et al., 2020; Kiela et al., 2021)


   -   How does this capability differ from other similarly defined capabilities?
        Example in HELM: Fairness vs. Bias (p.33-34)

        “Fairness and (social) bias differ. Fairness refers to disparities in the task-specific
        accuracy of models across social groups. In contrast, bias refers to properties of model
        generations, i.e. there is no (explicit) relationship with the accuracy or the specifics of a
        given task.”



Q4 - JUSTIFY: How are the capabilities of interest connected to the intended use of the
benchmark (specified in Q2)? Are the capabilities theoretically attainable by the objects
to be evaluated? Explain the interest in measuring the capabilities in Q3 and question whether
it may be impossible for the objects of evaluation to have said capabilities.


 This question is difficult to answer given that the intended use (Q2) is poorly specified. There
 is no discussion of theoretical attainability in the paper.


Q5 - SUPPORT: What validity evidence do the benchmark creators offer to support the
choice and definition of capabilities of interest?
 None discussed in the paper.
The Content Module
The content module specifies test items that the benchmark could require objects of evaluation
to perform or to respond to. The test items should elicit evidence about some capability of
interest, so that said capability evidence can be later extracted from the responses and
aggregated to produce a measurement of said capability.

Q6 - DESCRIBE:
   - Characterize the test items. Most often, NLP evaluation relies on input data, so this
      step could involve describing the data that is available to the benchmark to use, how the
      data is obtained, etc.
       The pool of test items consists of 15 existing datasets, organized according to task
       (defined as “what we want a system to do” and “correspond[ing] to language’s many
       functions” (p.16-17)). We copy below descriptions of the datasets in the HELM paper’s
       main body (i.e., without going into the original works introducing the datasets, and
       without going into HELM’s paper’s appendix, which contains more descriptions of the
       data):

         Task: Question Answering
         “Question answering (QA) is a fundamental task in NLP that underpins many
         real-world applications including web search, chatbots, and personal assistants.”
         (p.20)

         MMLU                    “To further ensure broad coverage of knowledge-intensive
                                 question answering across many disciplines, we add the
                                 MMLU meta-benchmark of 57 constituent datasets. MMLU
                                 (Measuring Massive Multitask Language Understanding)
                                 measures multitask accuracy and includes a diverse set of
                                 57 tasks, testing problem solving and general knowledge.”

         BoolQ                   It was added “to study model robustness to equivariances
                                 due to the available contrast set”

         NarrativeQA                -   It “tests reading comprehension through the
                                        understanding of books and movie scripts.”
                                    -   Added for domain coverage: stories

         NaturalQuestions           -   It “consists of questions from queries to Google
                                        search and annotations from Wikipedia; we consider
                                        both open-book and closed-book variants”.
                                    -   Added for domain coverage: web search queries

         QuAC                       -   It was added “to study model robustness to
                                        equivariances due to the available contrast set”
                                    -   Added for domain coverage: conversational
                                        questions (i.e. dialogue)

         HellaSwag                  -   “to ensure coverage of commonsense knowledge
                                 and reasoning”
                           -     “tests commonsense inference and was created
                                 through adversarial filtering to synthesize wrong
                                 answers”

OpenbookQA                 -     “to ensure coverage of commonsense knowledge
                                 and reasoning”
                           -     “is based on open book exams, with a collection of
                                 basic science facts and crowd-sourced
                                 multiple-choice questions to test understanding and
                                 application of these [basic science] facts.”

TruthfulQA                 -     “to ensure coverage of commonsense knowledge
                                 and reasoning”
                           -     “tests model truthfulness through questions that align
                                 with common human misconceptions, spanning law,
                                 medicine, finance, and politics, among others, that
                                 were adversarially generated using GPT-3 davinci v1
                                 (175B) as the target model.”


Task: Information Retrieval
“Information retrieval (IR) [...] is one of the most widely deployed language
technologies. It powers the Web and e-commerce search, and serves as a key
component in many knowledge-intensive NLP systems for open-domain question
answering or fact checking.” (p.21)

MS MARCO (regular)             “Both datasets evaluate retrieval out of a collection of
                               9M passages from the Web. The regular track contains
                               a large number of queries (e.g., over 500,000 training
                               set queries) with sparse relevance judgments: on
                               average, annotators identify only one “positive”
                               (relevant) passage for each query, and every other
                               passage is assumed to be a negative.” (p. 22)

MS MARCO (TREC)                “the TREC track contains only 43 queries that are
                               more rigorously annotated, with over 9,000
                               query–passage pairs with associated relevance
                               judgments corresponding to the 43 queries.” (p. 22)


Task: Summarization
“with growing practical importance given the ever-increasing volume of text that
would benefit from summarization” (p.23)

CNN/Dailymail       “news-type data” and “a dataset with largely extractive
                    reference summaries.” (p.24)

XSUM                “news-type data” and “a dataset with largely abstractive
                    reference summaries (meaning the string overlap between the
                      document and its summary in the dataset is relatively small on
                      average)” (p.24)


Task: Sentiment analysis
“Sentiment analysis is an iconic task in NLP that has led to widespread deployment
in finance, health, social media, with applications in many sectors in relation to
customer reviews of products and services” (p. 24)


IMDB              -    “it had the unique resource of a contrast set (Gardner et al.,
                       2020), which enables the measurement of robustness to
                       equivariances” (p. 24)
                  -    “is constructed from IMDB movie reviews, where users rate
                       movies from 1–10. These ratings are discretized to a binary
                       space, with reviews with a score at most 4 being labeled
                       negative and reviews with a score at least 7 being labeled
                       positive.” (p. 25)



Task: Toxicity detection
“Automated detection of toxic content has become increasingly critical to content
moderation policies at major companies and social media platforms such as Meta,
Twitter, and Reddit, including recent deployments that center language models.” (p.
25)

CivilComments         Contains metadata on data subjects “(recipients of toxicity)”,
(from the WILDS       which allows HELM to measure “performance disparities with
benchmark (Koh        respect to several demographic groups” (p. 26)
et al., 2021))


Task: Miscellaneous text classification
“There is a long and growing tail of miscellaneous text classification tasks with use
cases throughout society.43 While not all of these tasks have established traditions
and literatures in academia, we expect these tasks comprise an important class of
evaluations for assessing the practical utility of language models” (p. 26)

RAFT                  Collection of 11 ecologically-valid tasks with real applications:
                          - adverse drug effect detection (ADE)
                          - banking customer service query classification
                              (Banking77)
                          - harmful applications detection in NeurIPS impact
                              statements (NeurIPS)
                          - classification of level of adult English (OneStopEnglish)
                          - detection of overruling in legal statements (Overruling)
                          - institution classification of semiconductor organizations
                              (Semiconductor)
                            -   classification of papers that advance past screening for
                                charitable donations (SystematicReview)
                            -   classification of transformative artificial intelligence
                                research (TAI)
                            -   detection of unfair terms of service (ToS)
                            -   hate speech detection of Tweets (TweetEvalHate)
                            -   complaint detection in Tweets (TweetComplaints).

                         “By design, these tasks in RAFT are naturally-occurring, which
                         helps identify use cases where language models may be
                         deployed.” (p. 27)

    On robustness (invariance) and counterfactual fairness:
    HELM measures these two capabilities using perturbation, where each item is slightly
    modified to produce counterfactual items:
       - For robustness: add misspellings, extra spaces, perturb capitalization, and
           perturb contraction. Example:




       -   For fairness: perturb dialects (Standard American English and African American
           English), gender pronouns, gender terms, first names and last names.
           Example:




    Here, one example = the set of the original input and its accompanying set of
    perturbed inputs. (same applies for contrastive sets measuring equivariance
    robustness). But, for clarity’s sake, we will refer to it as a “set”.


-   Which capabilities of interest does each example aim to capture? Each example
    can aim to capture one or several capabilities amongst those listed in Q3.


    Each “Y” in the table below indicates that the instances from the dataset (row) are used
        to measure the capability (column).




Q7 - JUSTIFY: How does each example elicit evidence about its target capabilities?
Justify via the example descriptions above.
 Through the description of the datasets and their corresponding tasks (Q6), it seems that
 HELM justifies why the tasks capture “practical utility” (e.g., many real-world applications of
 question answering), and not the seven desiderata -- with the exception of few datasets being
 selected to capture Robustness or Fairness due to available contrastive sets or metadata.

 It is thus not clear how most test items elicit evidence about the capabilities of interest (e.g.,
 how does BoolQ elicit evidence about Toxicity)

 On robustness (invariance) and counterfactual fairness:
    - The perturbations for robustness (invariance) are said to be “natural and relatively
       mild” → therefore capture whether models are “stable [under] small,
       semantics-preserving perturbations” to the input content instance (?)
    - “While we believe this is suboptimal for actually matching a specific target distribution
       (e.g. we do not believe the lexical substitutions we make are a strong simulation of
       AAE speech, even beyond the absence of other forms of linguistic variation between
       AAE and SAE), our general belief is this should overestimate any performance
       disparities, which help to highlight fairness concerns (rather than underestimating
       these effects).” (p. 138) → capture evidence for fairness despite not simulating target
       distribution well (?)



Q8 - SUPPORT: What evidence do the benchmark creators offer to support content
validity of the test item? In other words, we question whether the data captures capabilities of
interest. Content validity is often based on analysis by external experts or benchmark users.
Besides the mention of RAFT being “ecologically valid”, there is no validity evidence or
validation process mentioned by HELM for its pool of test items.

The authors actually acknowledge this as a limitation of their work:

“While all the datasets we use were introduced in works with some process for quality
assurance, and the datasets we introduce similarly have some process for quality assurance,
we note no unified standard has been set to ensure all datasets are sufficiently valid.
Consequently, the quality and useful of our benchmark is contingent on this assumption: we
encourage future work to interrogate the validity of our datasets and to introduce protocols to
help ensure the validity of future datasets.” (p. 89)
The Adaptation Module
When evaluating humans, the benchmark might instruct them to perform a task by providing
instructions, training exercises, demonstrations, etc. When evaluating models/systems, there
are also myriad methods that i) modify the models/systems (e.g., fine-tuning), or ii) format or
add onto the input (e.g., adding examples in few-shot prompting). These adaptation methods
should be chosen carefully so as to not confound evaluation results.

Q9 - DESCRIBE: Given an input, how are the objects of evaluation adapted or instructed
to provide the output?


 Prompting with 5 in-context examples, which are fixed across the same dataset: “to select
 examples, we sample examples to ensure class coverage (for classification coverage) in
 order of class frequency, so the 5 most frequent classes will be represented in-context.
 Critically, we choose to fix the in-context examples across all evaluation instances” (p.49 )

 HELM provides abundant details on adaptation methods in their appendix J.


Q10 - JUSTIFY: Elaborate on the suitability of the adaptation methods for all intended
objects of evaluation.
 Although not explicitly stated, it can be implied that -- given language models are defined by
 HELM to be “a black box that takes as input a prompt” -- prompting is an appropriate
 adaptation method for language models. For the number of examples: “we follow Brown et al.
 (2020) in their choice of the number”.

Q11 - SUPPORT: What validity evidence do benchmark designers offer that supports the
choice of the adaptation methods?
 Experiments in Section 8.2: Prompting Analysis. Main findings:
    - Choice of in-context examples: “We observe that the performance of most models
        tends to be relatively consistent [...] Interestingly, we find that there are scenarios
        where all models tend to exhibit higher variance. A prominent example is
        NaturalQuestions (open-book), where the median range is 0.1730 (e.g., GPT-3 davinci
        v1 (175B) obtains F1 scores of 0.376, 0.611, and 0.636 across the three sets of
        in-context examples)” (p. 59)

    -   Number of in-context examples: across 𝑛 ∈ {0, 1, 2, 4, 8, 16}, n being the number
        of in-context examples. “We find that all models show clear improvement from 𝑛 = 0 to
        𝑛 = 1, sometimes having 0% accuracy in the zero-shot setting, with the consistent
        exception of CNN/DailyMail where zero-shot accuracy is better for almost all models.
        [...] However, for larger numbers of in-context examples, we do not see consistent
        benefits across all models and all scenarios. The sole exception is OPT (175B) which,
        besides CNN/DailyMail, shows a perfectly monotonically increasing relationship
        between number of shots and model accuracy for NaturalQuestions (open-book),
        IMDB, and CivilComments.” (Liang et al., 2022, p. 60)
   -   Prompt formatting: “The clear finding is that the best prompt formatting is not
       consistent across models (i.e. models can stand to improve in their interoperability). In
       particular, one variants lead to an accuracy of 67.3% for Anthropic-LM v4-s3 (52B) on
       NaturalQuestions (open-book), whereas the prompt performs very poorly for BLOOM
       (176B), which drops from an accuracy around 60% to 8.5%.” (Liang et al., 2022, p. 61)

However, these experiments did not change the design of the benchmark (e.g., despite the
negative result, the prompt formatting strategy remains the same)
The Assembly Module
Test items specified by the content module are what the benchmark could use. The assembly
module concerns what test items from that pool will actually be used by the benchmark for
evaluation, and whether this set allows the benchmark to gather sufficient evidence.

Q12 - DESCRIBE: How many test items are chosen to assemble the subset used for
evaluation? What factors inform this selection?
 For most datasets, all available test items are used(test sets in datasets’ existing train/dev/test
 splits). The exception is CNN/Dailymail and TruthfulQA with 1000 items selected:
     - CNN/Dailymail: “Since we are operating in the few-shot setting, we sampled training
          articles that were between 50 and 150 tokens in length, in order to be able to fit items
          within the context token constraints.” (p. 125)
     - TruthfulQA: 1/5 of the original dataset was used to provide in-context examples.


Q13 - JUSTIFY: How does the described assembly method ensure that the produced
subset elicits sufficient evidence for all capabilities of interest?
 Nothing mentioned.


Q14 - SUPPORT: What validity evidence do the benchmark creators offer to support the
choice of assembly methods?
 N/A given answer to Q13.
The Evidence Module

Evidence Extraction
In response to each presented test example, objects of evaluation produce observable
behaviors (referred to as “responses”) which are captured by the benchmark. From these
responses, the benchmark extracts evidence about capabilities of interest that said test example
targets (referred to as “salient evidence”).

Q15 - DESCRIBE: For each test example…
   - What responses are captured and used for evidence extraction? When evaluating
       humans, many types of responses can be captured: selection in multiple-choice
       questions, long-form answers, response time, etc. Similarly, the benchmark can use the
       generated text (decoded in a certain way), token probabilities, running time, etc.


        For all test items, the generated text is captured as the response. The parameters
        specifying the text generation are as follows:
           - Temperature: 0, except for summarization set at 0.3
           - Stop Condition: mainly enforced through stop sequences (generally the newline
                 character “\n”). Also limited by context window and a specified max token
                 number based on max reference token number for a given dataset.
           - Number of outputs: 1

        On robustness (invariance) and counterfactual fairness:
        For each set, we obtain a set of generated text, produced as described above.


   -   How is evidence extracted and represented?
        Evidence extraction methods generally vary depending on the dataset and on the
        capability of interest the method is meant to extract evidence for:

        For Accuracy:
         MMLU                    Exact match

         BoolQ                   Quasi-exact match

         NarrativeQA             F1

         NaturalQuestions        F1

         QuAC                    F1

         HellaSwag               Exact match

         OpenbookQA              Exact match

         TruthfulQA              Exact match
 MS MARCO (regular)      RR@K (K = 10)

 MS MARCO (TREC)         NDCG@K (K = 10)

 CNN/Dailymail           ROUGE-2

 XSUM                    ROUGE-2

 IMBD                    Quasi-exact match

 CivilComments           Quasi-exact match

 RAFT                    Quasi-exact match

Definition of the metrics (p.127-128)
   - Exact match: “the model generation match the correct reference exactly as
        strings”
   - Quasi-exact match: “quasi-exact match expands the exact match condition to
        identical strings up to some slightly post-processing of the model generation
        (i.e. lowercasing, removing whitespace and punctuation and articles)”
   - F1: “the correctness condition for F1 is more graded/not allor-nothing to tolerate
        partial string overlap”
   - RR@K:




   -    NDCG@K:




      - ROUGE-2: “consider 2-gram overlap to determine correctness”
(...)
For Toxicity: PerspectiveAPI classifier “maps sequences to toxicity probabilites where
𝑝 ∈ [0, 1]”. The threshold for toxicity at 𝑝 ≥ 0.5 (i.e. “toxic” if 𝑝 ≥ 0.5)

On robustness (invariance) and counterfactual fairness:




Where m is the Accuracy metric. Same formula for Fairness.
Q16 - JUSTIFY: How does the extracted evidence capture the capabilities of interest?
    Accuracy metrics are chosen because they are the “default” for a given dataset. No other
    justification is given for other metrics


Q17 - SUPPORT: What validity evidence do the benchmark creators offer to support the
choice of evidence extraction method?
    Nothing mentioned in general

    For ROUGE (task of summarization), the authors actually provide evidence that do not
    support the use of ROUGE: “when we compare the results of human evaluations to
    automated evaluations, we find the two are anti-correlated. ROUGE-2 scores favor fine-tuned
    models, whereas human judgments consistently prefer few-shot or zero-shot language
    models.” (p. 78)



Evidence Accumulation
Q18 - DESCRIBE: How is the evidence accumulated to draw insights about the objects of
evaluation in terms of capabilities of interest?
    For each capability of interest, average corresponding metric scores across every dataset. We
    thus obtain a vector of final scores for each dataset: (Accuracy x BoolQ), (Calibration x
    BoolQ), … (Toxicity x BoolQ).


Q19 - JUSTIFY: How does the method of accumulating evidence capture capabilities of
interest?
    The authors actually acknowledges the limitation of averaging:

       -   “It is important to call out the implicit assumption that accuracy is measured averaged
           over test instances. As a result, minority subpopulations could experience low
           accuracy despite a high average accuracy.” (p. 29)
       -   “Practically, by significantly increasing the volume of results we report for each model,
           our benchmark could overload a consumer of the results” (p. 90) Stakeholders need to
           decide for themselves how to interpret and use the reported results: ““Overall, the
           detail of our benchmark exposes decision points for different stakeholders to prefer
           one model over the other based on their values, preferences, and circumstances (e.g.
           an organization deploying a model on mobile should assign higher priority to the
           efficiency results)” (p. 90)



Q20 - SUPPORT: What validity evidence do the benchmark creators offer to support the
choice of evidence accumulation method?
    Nothing mentioned.
-
