Completed Worksheet: SuperGLUE
Evidence-Centered Benchmark Design
Evidence-Centered Benchmark Design (ECBD) is a framework that formalizes the benchmark
design process. It requires first specifying the intended use of the benchmark (including
specifying the objects of evaluation). The process is then broken down into five modules:
   - Capability module: capabilities that the benchmark aims to measure.
   - Content module: pool of test items that draw out responses from the objects.
   - Adaptation module: adapting or instructing the objects to complete the tasks.
   - Assembly module: selecting from the pool of test items to build the set used for
        evaluation.
   - Evidence module: extracting and accumulating evidence about the capabilities of
        interest from responses produced by the objects.

This worksheet provides guidance on how to create a new benchmark or analyze an existing
benchmark following ECBD. It can be completed from different perspectives: as the creator of a
new benchmark, as the custodian or the user of an existing benchmark, or as a third-party
analyzing benchmarks, etc. Each module contains three questions:
    - Describe: what design decisions did the benchmark creators make for this module?
    - Justify: why did the benchmark creators make these decisions? This involves forming a
        hypothesis that the decisions allow the module to accomplish its role in the process of
        gathering necessary capability evidence.
    - Evidence: what validity evidence do the benchmark creators have to support the above
        hypothesis? In other words, what shows that the module indeed accomplishes its role?
This worksheet is not a checklist, and it is not required to answer each question perfectly. These
questions are meant to encourage reflection and validation of benchmark design decisions, as
well as to guide benchmark documentation.
Table of Contents
Intended Use
The Capability Module
The Content Module
The Adaptation Module
The Assembly Module
The Evidence Module


Benchmark Name and Reference(s)
The references are the source of information used to complete this worksheet. For example, a
third-party analyzing an existing benchmark may choose to use the academic publication
introducing said benchmark as the source of information. Other sources of information could be
blogposts, official websites, or code repositories accompanying the benchmark.
 Alex Wang, Yada Pruksachatkun, Nikita Nangia, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix Hill,
 Omer Levy, and Samuel R. Bowman. 2019a. SuperGLUE: A stickier benchmark for
 general-purpose language understanding systems. In
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS)

 Alex Wang, Amapreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix Hill, Omer Levy, and Samuel R Bowman.
 2019b. GLUE: A multitask benchmark and analysis platform for natural language
 understanding. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR)

 From here onwards, passages from the GLUE paper will be cited as (GLUE, p.X) while
 passages from the SuperGLUE paper will be cited with only the page number: (p.X).

 URL: https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.5555/3454287.3454581

 Additionally to the leaderboard evaluation, SuperGLUE includes diagnostic datasets (“tools for
 model analysis” p. 6). For the purpose of this analysis, we focus on the leaderboard
 evaluation.


Who is filing the worksheet:
From what perspective is this worksheet completed? In other words, what is the relation
between the person(s) completing this worksheet and the benchmark that is the focus of this
worksheet?
 Third-party: Yu Lu Liu, Q. Vera Liao, Alexandra Olteanu, Jackie Chi Kit Cheung
Intended Use
The validity of a benchmark concerns whether it can be used as intended. It is therefore crucial
to first clearly establish the intended use of a benchmark before analyzing it or creating it.

Q1 - Who/What are the intended objects of evaluation? Elaboration on the objects of
evaluation (e.g., their assumed capabilities, demographic information for human objects of
evaluation, etc.) helps us better understand whether the benchmark is suitable for all intended
objects of evaluation.
 The main evaluatees are “general-purpose language understanding technologies for
 English.” (p.2) Additionally, we reason from the inclusion of “human performance estimates
 for all benchmark tasks" (p.2) that the intended evaluatees of the benchmark also includes
 humans (human performance estimated by the authors involved trained crowdworker
 annotators; see p.9).

 Restrictions on said technologies: “Any system or method that can produce predictions for the
 SuperGLUE tasks is eligible for submission to the leaderboard, subject to the data-use and
 submission frequency policies [...]. There are no restrictions on the type of methods that may
 be used, and there is no requirement that any form of parameter sharing or shared
 initialization be used across the tasks in the benchmark” (p.7)


Q2 - What is the intended use of the benchmark? Who are the intended users of the
benchmark? Benchmark results aim to provide insights about the objects of evaluation: how
are users meant to use these insights?
 “SuperGLUE has the same high-level motivation as GLUE: to provide a simple, hard-to-game
 measure of progress toward general-purpose language understanding technologies for
 English.” (p.2)

 GLUE has been used for:
    - Guiding “research towards general-purpose language understanding technologies”
    - “Afford straightforward comparison between [...] task-agnostic transfer learning
       techniques” and “exhibiting the transfer-learning potential of approaches like OpenAI
       GPT and BERT”.
 So, SuperGLUE inherits these intended uses.

 Although the intended users of the benchmark are not explicitly mentioned, the uses
 described above seem to imply that the users are researchers and developers of
 general-purpose natural language understanding technologies.
The Capability Module
The capability module specifies the capabilities that the benchmark aims to evaluate. The term
“capability” refers to a construct (e.g., quality criteria, skill, etc.) that the objects of evaluation are
thought to exhibit or possess. Capabilities often cannot be directly observed or directly
measured, thus requiring the benchmark to indirectly measure them by gathering necessary
evidence about said capabilities.

Q3 - DESCRIBE: i) What are the capabilities of interest? ii) How is each one defined, and
under what context is each one defined?
 The capability of interest is “General(-purpose) language understanding” (GLU), which
 seems to mean the ability “to learn to execute a range of different linguistic tasks in different
 domains”, inherited from GLUE (GLUE, p.1)

 Note that, when GLUE was introduced, “most NLU models above the word level are designed
 for a specific task and struggle with out-of-domain data” which the authors contrasted to the
 human ability to understand language which is “general, flexible, and robust” (GLUE, p.1).

 Although not explicitly stated so, GLUE seems to be decomposed into sub-capabilities such
 as “causal reasoning”, “commonsense reasoning”, etc. (See Q6, where we boldface potential
 sub-capabilities in SuperGLUE’s description of test items)


Additional recommended questions to consider so to further clarify and contextualize the
definitions (in benchmark analysis: as presented by the benchmark)
    - How does the definition used by the benchmark differ from other existing definitions of
         this capability?
         GLUE mentioned SentEval, decaNLP and other prior benchmarks for “general NLU
         systems”. However, when mentioning these prior works, SuperGLUE did not elaborate
         on whether they provide an explicit definition or conceptualization of NLU.

         Note that SuperGLUE also mentioned these benchmarks, with no additional
         information on them.


    -   How does this capability differ from other similarly defined capabilities?
         Nothing mentioned.


Q4 - JUSTIFY: How are the capabilities of interest connected to the intended use of the
benchmark (specified in Q2)? Are the capabilities theoretically attainable by the objects
to be evaluated? Explain the interest in measuring the capabilities in Q3 and question whether
it may be impossible for the objects of evaluation to have said capabilities.


 They could be directly connected: progress on “general-purpose language understanding
 technologies” necessarily involves measuring “general-purpose language understanding”.
 This seems circular, though.
Q5 - SUPPORT: What evidence do you have to support the choice and definition of
capabilities of interest?
Nothing mentioned.
The Content Module
The content module specifies test items that the benchmark could require objects of evaluation
to perform or to respond to. The test items should elicit evidence about some capability of
interest, so that said capability evidence can be later extracted from the responses and
aggregated to produce a measurement of said capability.

Q6 - DESCRIBE:
   - Characterize the test items. Most often, NLP evaluation relies on input data, so this
      step could involve describing the data that is available to the benchmark to use, how the
      data is obtained, etc.

       The content instances are from existing work and are organized accordingly:
       Prior Work            Description provided in the SuperGLUE paper (p. 5 - 6)

       BoolQ (Boolean        “QA task where each example consists of a short
       Questions, Clark et   passage and a yes/no question about the passage”
       al., 2019)

       CB                    “Each example consists of a premise containing an
       (CommitmentBank,      embedded clause and the corresponding hypothesis is
       De Marneffe et al.,   the extraction of that clause.”
       2019)

       COPA (Choice of       “Causal reasoning task in which a system is given a
       Plausible             premise sentence and must determine either the cause
       Alternatives,         or effect of the premise from two possible choices.”
       Roemmele et al.,
       2011)

       MultiRC               “QA task where each example consists of a context
       (Multi-Sentence       paragraph, a question about that paragraph, and a list of
       Reading               possible answers.” with the following desirable property:
       Comprehension,        “the questions are designed such that answering each
       Khashabi et al.,      question requires drawing facts from multiple context
       2018)                 sentences”

       ReCoRD (Reading       “Each example consists of a news article and a
       Comprehension         Cloze-style question about the article in which one entity
       with                  is masked out. The system must predict the masked out
       Commonsense           entity from a list of possible entities in the provided
       Reasoning             passage, where the same entity may be expressed with
       Dataset, Zhang et     multiple different surface forms, which are all considered
       al., 2018)            correct.”

       RTE (Recognizing      Merging RTE1 (Dagan et al., 2006), RTE2 (Bar Haim et
       Textual Entailment)   al., 2006), RTE3 (Giampiccolo et al., 2007), and
                             RTE5 (Bentivogli et al., 2009).
                             “All datasets are combined and converted to two-class
                             classification: entailment and not_entailment.”

       WiC                   “Word sense disambiguation task cast as binary
       (Word-in-Context,     classification of sentence pairs. Given two text snippets
       Pilehvar and          and a polysemous word that appears in both sentences,
       Camacho-Collados      the task is to determine whether the word is used with
       , 2019)               the same sense in both sentences.”

       WSC (Winograd         “Coreference resolution task in which examples
       Schema                consist of a sentence with a pronoun and a list of noun
       Challenge,            phrases from the sentence. The system must determine
       Levesque et al.,      the correct referrent of the pronoun from among the
       2012)                 provided choices.
                             Winograd schemas are designed to require everyday
                             knowledge and commonsense reasoning to solve.”


   -   Which capabilities of interest does each test item aim to capture? Each instance
       can aim to capture one or several capabilities amongst those listed in Q3.
        Since the benchmark has one capability of interest (GLU), we infer that all test
        items aim to measure GLU.

        An alternative view (of sub-capabilities as explained in Q3) would be that each
        item aims to measure a type of GLU capability (i.e. sub-capabilities) as
        inherited from the tasks described in Q6 (e.g., items from the COPA dataset
        aim to measure “causal reasoning”). All these sub-capabilities, combined
        together, contribute to the measurement of GLU.

Q7 - JUSTIFY: How does each test item elicit evidence about its target capabilities?
Justify via the item descriptions above.
 One of SuperGLUE’s criteria for included tasks is that “tasks should test a system’s
 ability to understand and reason about texts in English.” (p. 4) We found no explicit
 elaboration and justification as to why the included tasks elicit evidence about
 systems' GLU capability.

Q8 - SUPPORT: What evidence do the benchmark creators offer to support content
validity of the test items? In other words, we question whether the data captures capabilities
of interest. Content validity is often based on analysis by external experts or benchmark users.
 Nothing mentioned.
The Adaptation Module
When evaluating humans, the benchmark might instruct them to perform a task by providing
instructions, training exercises, demonstrations, etc. When evaluating models/systems, there
are also myriad methods that i) modify the models/systems (e.g., fine-tuning), or ii) format or
add onto the input (e.g., adding examples in few-shot prompting). These adaptation methods
should be chosen carefully so as to not confound evaluation results.

Q9 - DESCRIBE: Given an input, how are the objects of evaluation adapted or instructed
to provide the output?
 “Any system or method that can produce predictions for the SuperGLUE tasks is eligible for
 submission to the leaderboard”

 The only requirement related to the adaptation method is data-related: “Systems may only
 use the SuperGLUE-distributed versions of the task datasets, as these use different
 train/validation/test splits from other public versions in some cases. Systems also may not use
 the unlabeled test data for the tasks in system development in any way, may not use the
 structured source data that was used to collect the WiC labels (sense-annotated example
 sentences from WordNet, VerbNet, and Wiktionary) in any way, and may not build systems
 that share information across separate test examples in any way.” (p. 7)

 As for human evaluatees, they are trained before annotating. Task-specific instructions are
 shown in Appendix C. Example:
Q10 - JUSTIFY: Elaborate on the suitability of the adaptation methods for all intended
objects of evaluation.
 Nothing mentioned, but the data requirement might be to ensure “fairness” across submitted
 systems (avoiding data contamination) (?)


Q11 - SUPPORT: What validity evidence do benchmark designers offer that supports the
choice of the adaptation methods?
 Nothing mentioned.
The Assembly Module
Test items specified by the content module are what the benchmark could use. The assembly
module concerns what test items from that pool will actually be used by the benchmark for
evaluation, and whether this set allows the benchmark to gather sufficient evidence.

Q12 - DESCRIBE: How many items are chosen to assemble the subset used for
evaluation? What factors inform this selection?
 See sizes of the test sets → (Table 1, p. 3).

 There are no mentions of factors informing the
 assembly of the test sets. We assume that
 SuperGLUE took the test sets from their original work
 and omitted to describe how these test sets were
 originally assembled.

 Exceptions:
    - CB: SuperGLUE used “a subset of the data that had inter-annotator agreement above
        80%” (p. 5)
    - WSC: “The test examples are derived from fiction books and have been shared with us
        by the authors of the original dataset.” (p. 6)

 For human evaluatees, SuperGLUE randomly sample 100 examples from the task’s test set
 for them to annotate (p. 17).


Q13 - JUSTIFY: How does the described assembly method ensure that the produced
subset elicits sufficient evidence for all capabilities of interest?
 Nothing mentioned.


Q14 - SUPPORT: What validity evidence do the benchmark creators offer to support the
choice of assembly methods?
 Nothing mentioned.
The Evidence Module

Evidence Extraction
In response to each presented test item, objects of evaluation produce observable behaviors
(referred to as “responses”) which are captured by the benchmark. From these responses, the
benchmark extracts evidence about capabilities of interest that said test item targets (referred to
as “salient evidence”).

Q15 - DESCRIBE: For each test item…
   - What responses are captured and used for evidence extraction? When evaluating
       humans, many types of responses can be captured: selection in multiple-choice
       questions, long-form answers, response time, etc. Similarly, the benchmark can use the
       generated text (decoded in a certain way), token probabilities, running time, etc. .
        Predicted class labels


   -   How is evidence extracted and represented?
        The evaluation method for each corpus differs:
           - BoolQ, CB, COPA, RTE, WiC, WSC use exact-match;
           - MultiRC uses F1 over all answer-options and exact match of each question’s
              set of answers
           - ReCoRD uses max (over all options) token-level F1 and exact match.

        The “gold” labels for each content instance -- we assume -- come from the corpus’
        original work. SuperGLUE does not mention exactly how these labels are obtained
        (e.g., human annotation, use of heuristics, etc.)


Q16 - JUSTIFY: How does the extracted evidence capture the capabilities of interest?
 Nothing mentioned.


Q17 - SUPPORT: What validity evidence do the benchmark creators offer to support the
choice of evidence extraction method?
 Nothing mentioned.


Evidence Accumulation
Q18 - DESCRIBE: How is the evidence accumulated to draw insights about the objects of
evaluation in terms of capabilities of interest?
 For dataset-level scores, ost use accuracy, with the exception of:
    - CB: macro-average F1 is also computed →
    - MultiRC and ReCoRD: average of item-level score (?)

 Average (uniform weights) is computed over dataset-level scores to produce the SuperGLUE
score.


Q19 - JUSTIFY: How does the method of accumulating evidence capture capabilities of
interest?
For the system performance score, each corpus is weighted equally because “a fair criterion
with which to weight the contributions of each task to the overall score” is lacking (p. 6).

The implication is that tasks included in SuperGLUE contribute equally to general language
understanding.


Q20 - SUPPORT: What validity evidence do the benchmark creators offer to support the
choice of evidence accumulation method?
Nothing mentioned.
